Manifesto 
2007 



Contents 

Introduction 5 
Our vision for government 6 
Our vision of independence 7 
Summary and highlights of our programme 8 
First Minister 14 
Finance and Sustainable Growth 18 
Health and Wellbeing 34 
Education, Skills, Culture and Arts 48 
Justice 58 
Rural Affairs 67 


4 


It’s time 

to move forward. 

On May 3 Scotland will choose a new government. 

After 8 years of low ambition and low achievement from the current Scottish 
Executive we believe it is time for fresh thinking and a new approach. 

This manifesto sets out our ideas and proposals to build a more successful Scotland. 

It’s time for a nation that is healthier, with vital health services kept local; 
communities that are safer with a more visible police presence on our streets and 
families that are wealthier, with lower and fairer local tax leaving more money in 
peoples pockets at the end of every month. 

As First Minister I will do everything in my power to deliver greater opportunity for 
all of Scotland. 

I have no doubt Scotland can match the achievement of similar nations and secure a 
future built on shared prosperity, justice and peace. 

We are working hard to earn the trust and support of the people of Scotland and 
we will trust Scots to take the decision on Scotland’s future in an independence 
referendum. The choice will be yours. That is the fair and democratic way. 

It’s time for a Scottish government that cares about success for our nation. 
Nicola Sturgeon and I are ready to take Scotland forward. 

It’s time for the SNP. 


Our vision for government 

Fresh thinking and a new approach 

The SNP has clear ambitions for Scotland. We have no doubt Scotland can be more successful. 

Healthier 

Our nation can be healthier. The SNP will keep vital health services local and reverse the 
decision to close Ayr and Monklands A&E. With an SNP government there will be a presumption 
against centralisation of core hospital services to protect local access to healthcare. 

Wealthier 

Families in Scotland can be wealthier. An SNP government will remove the burden of business 
rates from 120,000 small businesses, freeing them to grow and create more and better paid 
jobs. Small businesses sit at the heart of local economies and with the right support they will 
flourish. 

Safer 

Local communities can be safer. An SNP government will put more police on our streets to 
detect and deter crime. And we will come down hard on those who sell alcohol to underage 
Scots and fuel anti-social behaviour. 

Fairer 

Local taxes can be fairer. The SNP will scrap the Council Tax and introduce a fairer system 
based on ability to pay. Families and individuals on low and middle incomes will on average be 
between £260 and £350 a year better off. Nine out of ten pensioners will pay less local tax. 

Easier 

Life should be easier for young families. The SNP will increase by 50% the amount of free 
nursery education available for 3 and 4 year olds. 

Greener 

Scotland can be greener. An SNP government will not give the go ahead for new nuclear power 
stations. We will invest instead in developing Scotland’s extensive renewable energy potential. 

Smarter 

Scotland can be smarter. It’s time for more opportunities for young Scots with smaller class 
sizes and it’s time to dump student debt. 


Our vision 


A more successful Scotland 

The SNP cares about success for families in Scotland. That is why we are passionate about 
independence and equality for our nation. 

The 300-year old Union is no longer fit for purpose. It was never designed for the 21st century 
world. It is well past its sell by date and is holding Scotland back. 

The SNP believe Scotland and England should be equal nations – friends and partners - both 
free to make our own choices. 

Success for Scotland 

Scotland can be more successful. Looking around at home and at our near neighbours abroad, 
more and more Scots believe this too. Independence is the natural state for nations like our own. 

Scotland has the people, the talent and potential to become one of the big success stories of 
the 21st century. We can match the success of independent Norway – according to the UN the 
best place in the world to live. We can do as well as independent Ireland, now the fourth most 
prosperous nation on the planet. 

With independence Scotland will be free to flourish and grow. We can give our nation a 
competitive edge. 

Peace and Prosperity 

Together we can build a more prosperous nation, a Scotland that is a force for good, a voice 
for peace in our world. 
Free to bring Scottish troops home from Iraq. 
Free to remove nuclear weapons from Scotland’s shores. 
Free to invest our oil wealth in a fund for future generations. 


Peace and prosperity - equality and opportunity. 
These are some of the best reasons for independence and why the SNP trust the people of 
Scotland to decide on independence in a referendum. 


The choice will rest with you – that is the fair and democratic way. 



Summary and highlights of our programme 


Office of the First Minister 

The responsibilities of the First Minister will be: 

• Make sure Scottish government is working efficiently 
• Build a wealthier and more successful Scotland 
• Ensure that Scotland is making progress across the full range of policy portfolios so our 
nation becomes healthier, safer and fairer 
• Increase Scotland’s profile world wide 
Priorities include: 
• The creation of a smaller and better focused ministerial team including a review of the agency 
structure with the aim of reducing bureaucracy and overlap and improving local delivery 
• The creation of a Council of Economic Advisers to provide independent advice so we can make 
Scotland the best place in Europe to do business 
• Publication of a White Paper detailing the concept of Scottish independence in the modern 
world as part of preparations for offering Scots the opportunity to decide on independence 
in a referendum, with a likely date of 2010 
• An enhanced relationship with the EU and a partnership of equals with the 
government in London 
• Doubling Scotland’s international aid budget 
Department of Finance and Sustainable Growth 

The responsibilities of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will be: 

• Better value in the Scottish budget 
• Higher sustainable economic growth 
• More Scots in better paid jobs 
• Easing the commute 
• A greener Scotland 
• Making the most of Scotland’s renewable and green energy potential 
Priorities include: 
• Delivering a more efficient government with annual efficiency savings of 1.5% per annum and 
smaller government, meeting the Treasury target of 5% annual administration savings 
• Taking the right choices to ensure best value on capital spending, freeing up £1.1 billion for 
reallocation to new national infrastructure projects 

Manifesto 2007 


• Ensuring 70% of released resources are focused on enhanced frontline delivery of public 
services and 30% to deliver lower local tax as part of our social democratic contract with 
Scotland 
• Introduction of a small business bonus, removing the burden of business rates from 120,000 
Scottish small businesses and reducing the rates bill for a further 30,000 
• Scrapping the unfair council tax and replacing it with a system based on ability to pay. 
The local income tax rate will be set at 3p 
• Establishing a Scottish Investment Fund to get best value from Scottish underspends with 
income from the fund allocated to support business start ups, research and social enterprises 
• Securing better value funding for capital projects with a Scottish Futures Trust 
• Steps to reduce red-tape and widen access to public procurement contracts for small 
businesses 
• Refocus the Enterprise network to provide a more streamlined service for the Scottish 
business community and support key industries such as the tourism sector 
• New measures to support innovation and extend access to vocational skills 
• Substantial investment in improvements to our rail infrastructure to ease the commute and 
cut journey times between our major cities 
• Additional efforts to cut congestion 
• A commitment to early delivery of a new Forth crossing 
• Commissioning a study into Road Equivalent Tariff with a pilot project to the Western Isles 
Minister for Energy and the Environment 

• New ambitious targets for carbon reduction and generation from low carbon sources 
• Ensuring no new nuclear power stations are built in Scotland 
• Higher building standards and new efforts to increase energy efficiency 
• Development of community and household generation with decentralisation of generation 
capacity and the development of local heat and power grids 
• Introduction of a Climate Change Bill based on building cross-party consensus on measures to 
reduce Scotland’s carbon footprint 
• Making better use of public procurement to recognise environmental and community aspects, 
with a particular emphasis on sustainability 

Summary and highlights of our programme 


Department of Health and Wellbeing 

The responsibilities of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will be: 

• Build a stronger, patient focused NHS 
• Greater independence through quality care 
• Helping people to lead healthier lives 
• A new focus on the needs of Scotland’s communities 
Priorities include: 
• Making the most of NHS capacity to treat more patients faster. This will enable us to give 
every patient a legally binding waiting time 
• A presumption against centralisation of core hospital services to protect local access to 
healthcare 
• Direct elections to health boards to give local people a say when decisions are made 
• Phasing out prescription charges to end an unfair tax on ill health 
• Improved access to counselling and talking therapies in every health board area 
• Annual health checks and individual health plans for school pupils with a doubling of the 
number of school nurses 
• A school based dental service to improve oral health and reduce dental decay 
• The introduction of free school meals, beginning with our youngest children and expanding 
free entitlement for children in poverty 
• More opportunities for youngsters to be fit and active with 2 hours PE per week for every 
pupil, a moratorium on the sale of playing fields and free access to council swimming pools 
• Introducing ‘Life begins’ health checks and individual health plans for all men and women 
when they reach the age of 40 with the aim to extend this initiative to Scots reaching 
retirement age 
• Improving support for carers, including additional funding for young carers and improved 
access to respite care 
• Increasing payments for free personal and nursing care in line with inflation 
• Introducing a first time buyers’ grant of £2000 and the creation of a Scottish Housing Support 
Fund, to provide loans to first time buyers on a shared equity basis 

Manifesto 2007 


Department of Education, Skills, Culture and Arts 

The responsibilities of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Skills will be: 

• Building firm foundations for learning 
• Providing improved opportunities to learn 
• Creating a springboard for life through Higher and Further education 
• Supporting culture and creativity 
Priorities include: 
• Delivery of a 50 per cent increase in free nursery education for 3 and 4 year olds, with a 
nursery teacher for every centre 
• Smaller class sizes, starting with a reduction in the first three years of primary to 18 or less 
• Putting science, modern languages and technology at the heart of the curriculum 
• Expansion of school-college partnerships for S3 and S4 so that all pupils can experience 
vocational learning 
• Creating an Additional Support Fund 
• Introduction of a Scottish Science Baccalaureate and a Scottish Language Baccalaureate 
• Focusing the skills agenda so that people of all ages have access to relevant, valued and 
quality assured training opportunities throughout their working lives 
• Abolition of the Graduate Endowment tuition fee 
• Replacing the expensive and discredited Student Loans system 
• Removing the burden of the debt repayments owed to the Student Loans Company by Scottish 
domiciled and resident graduates. 
• Providing an additional £10 million for cutting edge research in Scotland 
• Introducing a range of measures to benefit emerging and existing artists and the creation of 
a £2million 'Edinburgh Festival Expo Fund' to promote Scottish work at the Festivals 

Summary and highlights of our programme 


Department of Justice 

The responsibilities of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will be: 

• Providing a stronger focus on safer communities 
• Increase public protection 
• Addressing the causes of crime 
• Ensuring the most appropriate sentencing, punishment and rehabilitation 
Priorities include: 
• Putting more police onto local streets with a more visible police presence 
• Early discussions with the UK government to enable the Scottish Parliament to legislate on 
firearms and ensure tight restrictions on air weapons 
• A new system, giving communities more information on dangerous paedophiles in their area 
• Getting tough on the sale of alcohol to underage Scots and extending controls on heavy 
discounting of alcohol to the supermarkets 
• Creating a new Serious Crime Taskforce bringing together a range of expertise to best tackle 
organised crime 
• Increasing support for schemes that offer a route out of crime 
• Introducing a new emphasis on tough community punishments to end what is often a rotating 
door of short-term custodial sentencing 

Summary and highlights of our programme 


Department for Rural Affairs 

The responsibilities of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs will be: 

• Support sustainable growth in the rural economy 
• Growing Scotland’s agriculture sector 
• Building a better future for the fishing industry 
Priorities include: 
• Supporting renewable generation with a particular focus on increasing the use and supply of 
energy crops as bio-fuels 
• Introducing a £10 million new entrants scheme for the farming community 
• Delivering a range of initiatives to reduce the burden of regulation on the farming community 
• Maximising the use of locally produced food in public sector contracts 
• Taking a lead role in the UK delegation to EU fisheries negotiations 
• Enlisting support among EU partners for repatriation of fisheries responsibilities 
• Involving the fishing community more closely in conservation policy 
• Working to secure quota allocation from decommissioned vessels for active vessels 
• Additional support for the onshore fishing sector and specific marketing support for 
abundant supplies 
This programme builds on our proposals already set out in Building a more successful Scotland, 
Let Scotland Flourish and It's time to look forward. 


First Minister 

I. Office of the First Minister 
Scotland deserves better. As a nation we have so much potential. The SNP has no doubt 
Scottish communities can be safer, our families wealthier, and our country healthier. Day to day 
life should be easier and the way we run our country fairer. 

We only have to look around us at similar nations – Ireland and Norway to name just two – to 
see the levels of success Scotland should be reaching. With determination and a new approach 
we believe Scotland can be the better place we all seek. 

As leader of the Scottish government, the role of the First Minister is to drive our nation 
forward and to maximise Scottish success. Improvement and progress will not happen 
overnight, however with fresh thinking and a total belief in Scotland and our abilities, we can 
begin to move closer to the levels of wealth and quality of life that are enjoyed in nearby 
nations. 

Departmental Priorities 

Make sure Scottish government is working efficiently 

There will be a deputy minister in the Office of the First Minister with responsibility for 
Parliament and Public Sector Reform. 

Reform of the structure of government 

We will deliver a smaller, better-focused ministerial team, and more powerful and effective 
departments to ensure delivery of our key public policy priorities. We propose a new structure 
for government in Scotland that will focus on improving leadership and delivery in a way that 
has not been achieved by the current Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive. 

Departments will be led by new Cabinet Secretaries who will drive forward government policy 
on economic growth and public service improvements. The number of Scottish Executive 
Departments will be cut from 9 to 6. These will be: 

Office of the First Minister 
Finance and Sustainable Growth 
Health and Wellbeing 
Education and Skills 
Justice 
Rural Affairs 


14 


Manifesto 2007 


Review of agency structure 

We will conduct an early review of our agency structure, with a clear aim of reducing 
bureaucracy, and overlap, and improving local delivery. The functions of some agencies will 
be shared between central and local government. 

A people’s parliament 

We will begin discussions on strengthening the role of the Futures’ Forum so it works more 
closely with government to investigate and recommend long-term goals for our nation. We will 
publish proposals to bring parliament closer to the people, with greater support for backbench 
legislative proposals, an opportunity for citizens to propose debates in parliament and a 
mechanism to allow for the best supported public petition in any year to be brought forward 
as a detailed legislative proposal. 

Scottish Civil Service 

We will also seek early discussions on the creation of a wholly devolved Scottish civil service 
on the same model and basis as the Northern Irish civil service. 

Build a wealthier and more successful Scotland 
Council of Economic Advisers 

A key priority for government is increasing Scotland’s economic growth and the First Minister 
will convene a Council of Economic Advisers to provide independent advice so we can make 
Scotland the best place in Europe to do business. This will be supported by a National 
Economic Forum to ensure input from key stakeholders including Scotland’s trade unions and 
the business community. 

White Paper and Referendum 

Publication of a White Paper, encompassing a Bill, detailing the concept of Scottish 
independence in the modern world as part of preparations for offering Scots the opportunity 
to decide on independence in a referendum, with a likely date of 2010. 


First Minister 


Ensure that Scotland is making progress 

New monitoring arrangements 

We will bring forward proposals for new management and monitoring arrangements for 
government and agencies, based on the successful model in Virginia, USA, so we can bring 
greater rigour and success to the delivery of public policy in our nation. 

Health of the Nation Report 

The SNP in government will produce an annual ‘Health of the Nation’ report, bringing together 
key targets on crime, health, education, the environment, opportunity, social mobility, life 
expectancy, business start-ups and the number of Scots who are economically active. We must 
be in a position to judge Scotland’s progress, and be able to link what we know about the 
economy and society to tailor new policies, ensuring that no section of Scotland is left behind. 

Increase Scotland’s profile worldwide 

There will be a deputy minister in the Office of the First Minister with responsibility for Europe 
and External Relations. 

EU Relations 

In the EU we will press for Scotland to take the lead in negotiations on fisheries. We will work 
with the UK government to increase and enhance Scotland’s role across the full range of policy 
areas for which the Scottish Parliament has responsibility. We will also engage with our 
European partners to press for the creation of an EU Renewable and Low Carbon Energy 
Research Centre, based in Scotland. 

The SNP wants a stronger voice for Scotland in the EU and we will seek to improve direct 
contacts with the Commission, reform Scottish Parliamentary scrutiny of EU legislative 
proposals and seek closer relations with other parliaments. We propose enhanced procedures 
for implementing European legislation in Scotland and better post-implementation monitoring 
to reduce the burden and free Ministers to introduce legislation that suits Scotland. 


Manifesto 2007 


Working with Whitehall 

We will seek to strengthen the concordats between the Scottish Executive and Whitehall 
departments to maximise the role and influence of the Scottish government across the full 
range of reserved and devolved policy areas. 

We will engage positively and constructively with the UK government across a range of issues 
in order to secure the best deal for Scotland. Early discussions will include options for the 
transfer of responsibility for North Sea oil and gas to the Scottish parliament, as an extension 
of arrangements already in place with Northern Ireland and formerly with the Isle of Man. 
We will seek to restart meetings of the Joint Ministerial Committees. 

International Aid 

For the wider world, we will double the International Development budget. We will work with 
Scotland’s Aid Agencies to ensure this support meets the needs of those in greatest need. 

Co-operation on energy 

We will build on initial discussions with the Norwegian government and EU Commission on 
proposals for a North Sea super-grid, able to take electricity from offshore Scotland and 
Norway direct to markets in mainland Europe. Taking forward this initiative will be a priority 
for an SNP led government and we will seek an early meeting with Norwegian ministers to 
explore options. 

We will also seek co-operation with the UK government on steps to develop Scotland’s carbon 
capture and storage potential and in particular to see the early go ahead for the Peterhead 
Hydrogen Power Project. 

Scotland in the world 

The Office of the First Minister will oversee efforts across Scotland’s departments and agencies 
to maximise Scotland’s international profile. Our focus will be on presenting Scotland as the 
ideal location for investment and tourism, supporting Scottish business initiatives overseas 
and working with the Scottish diaspora to make the most of Scotland’s reputation worldwide. 

In particular, we believe we can get a far better return for public investment with support for 
Scotland Houses opened by Scottish business people internationally – similar to the one 
recently opened in Estonia. We propose £1 million kick-start funding to develop similar 
initiatives world-wide. 


Finance and Sustainable Growth 


II. Department of Finance and Sustainable Growth 
Scotland is surrounded by an Arc of Prosperity. In Norway, Iceland and Ireland we have three of 
the six wealthiest nations in the world. There is no doubt Scotland has the people, talent and 
resources to match their success. 

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will be responsible for the effective 
management of Scotland’s budget and delivering the right mix of policies to ensure faster, 
sustainable growth in the Scottish economy. 

Departmental Priorities 
Better value in the Scottish budget 


We want to see a new rigour in Scotland’s finances so we can deliver better value and get the 
best possible return for frontline public services and Scottish taxpayers. 

As with any budget, whether it is the billions of government or the thousands for Scottish 
families, we must make sure we get the best return from our investment and our resources are 
directed towards what is good and effective. 

We know from the most recent UK budget that the Comprehensive Spending Review will 
allocate an additional £1.8 billion to the Scottish block. We will use this additional resource 
to invest in the frontline with a particular focus on health, education and tackling crime. 

The Scottish budget process for 2007-08 is well under way and there is only limited room for 
manoeuvre. However, with anticipated underspends of £200 million and a Scottish reserve 
of unallocated money worth some £800 million, there is a pool of potential available resources 
of £1 billion for next year. This provides the flexibility to allow us to deliver on new policy 
priorities. 

Our financial plans for 2008-11 represent a strengthened approach to good government that 
we believe will deliver key advantages to Scottish families and communities. Together they will 
release £4.3 billion over the three years of the spending review period and allow us to take 
forward our key priorities in government – a healthier Scotland with healthcare kept local; a 
safer Scotland with more police on our streets and a wealthier Scotland with lower local tax 
and our small businesses freed from the burden of business rates and able to grow. 

18 


Manifesto 2007 


Efficient Government 

We will deliver annual efficiency savings equivalent to 1.5% of the Scottish budget. This is well 
within the target set by the Treasury for efficiency savings across UK government and matches 
savings achieved by the current Executive over the previous 3 year spending period. However, 
this process of improvement must continue. In 2011 ongoing efficiencies will release over £1.3 
billion of funding for new priorities – a total over three years of almost £2.7 billion. 

As part of this process we will extend e-procurement, delivering a system of Smart Purchasing 
that provides savings at all levels of government and gives Scottish companies of all sizes 
greater access to the full range of government contracts. 

Smaller Government 

We will meet UK Treasury targets for a 5% annual saving from administration costs with 
Scotland’s Executive Agencies expected to match annual savings in core Scottish Executive 
departments. 

The number of Scottish Executive Departments will be cut by one third from nine to six and we 
will conduct an early review of our agency structure. We will ask each part of government, 
including agencies and Scotland’s local authorities, to identify potential surplus assets and set 
out a timetable for disposal through the period covered by the 2008-11 spending review. 

Together, this process of streamlining government will release nearly £500 million over the 
three years. 

Capital 

We will seek national best value for our capital spending, with £1.1 billion of current planned 
expenditure on EARL and Edinburgh trams redirected. 

We also propose a new system of infrastructure funding as an alternative to the costly and 
flawed PFI/PPP. Over the first term of an SNP government we will introduce a not-for-profit 
Scottish Futures Trust, which will provide lower cost borrowing opportunities. We expect the 
Scottish Futures Trust to emerge as a more attractive source of funding for both national and 
local projects which will effectively crowd out PFI/PPP over time. 

Current PFI/PPP contracts will be unaffected and it will be open to local authorities and other 
public bodies to choose between PFI/PPP and Scottish Futures Bonds for planned and future 
projects. In particular, we will match brick for brick current plans for improvements in our 
schools and hospitals. 


Finance and Sustainable Growth 

Prioritising the frontline 

We will allocate 70% of released resources for our new priorities to improve frontline delivery 
of public services – keeping vital health services local, reducing class sizes and putting more 
police on local streets. That is part of our social democratic contract with Scotland. This will 
free £3 billion to invest in the people’s priorities over the three years of the spending review 
period. 

Lower local tax 

An SNP government will set local taxes low and fair. We will assign the remaining 30% of 
released resources to lower local tax for Scottish families and businesses, cash-back worth 
£500, for example, to the average pensioner couple. 

Our commitment will put almost £1.3 billion back into the accounts of Scottish families and the 
tills of Scottish businesses. It will provide a welcome boost to family budgets and Scotland’s 
economy. 

We will scrap the unfair Council Tax and introduce a Local Income Tax set at 3p. This will 
apply at both the basic and higher income tax rate and will not be levied on savings income. 
Second homes will continue to be liable to local tax and will make the same level of 
contribution as present, with payments made through business rates. 

We will reform business rates with the introduction of a Small Business Bonus. Businesses with 
a rateable value of £8,000 or less will no longer pay business rates. Those with a rateable value 
of between £8,001 and £10,000 will be entitled to a 50% business rate relief; and businesses 
with a rateable value of between £10,001 and £15,000 will be entitled to a relief of 25%. 

Higher Sustainable Economic Growth 

The SNP’s economic growth strategy, Let Scotland Flourish, sets out a range of proposals to 
give Scotland an economic edge. It forms part of our manifesto package. 

Economy Targets 

To ensure Scotland matches the success of similar nations, we propose three specific targets: 

• be among the top 15 most competitive countries in the world 
-including being the most competitive among the present UK nations, building on the fact 
that Bavaria is ranked more competitively than Germany, Catalonia is ranked higher than 
Spain and Lombardy is ranked higher than Italy 

Manifesto 2007 


• match the growth rate of small European nations 
-performing like other small European nations would mean an independence bonus of an 
additional £19bn in the economy over 10 years, or £10,000 per family in Scotland 
• grow the population by 3% over the next 10 years 
-gain 150,000 by creating opportunities so fewer Scots would feel the need to leave, more 
Scots would return, and more ‘new Scots’ would come to Scotland 
Growth must include the whole society and not come at the expense of our environment. We set 
ourselves a new commitment to deliver high levels of sustainable growth for Scotland, with 
three Scottish standards – solidarity, cohesion and sustainability: 

i. Solidarity - overall wealth and the proportion of national wealth held by each of the lowest 
six income deciles to increase. 
ii. Cohesion – the wealth of every region to increase, and for there to be a 10 per cent 
reduction in GDP (gross value added) disparity per head between the richest and poorest 
parts of Scotland. 
iii. Sustainability – extend the current emissions commitment beyond 2012 to ensure 
continued cuts in CO2 output equivalent to a 3 per cent annual reduction. 
These new golden rules for Scottish economic growth will require an SNP government to focus 
on the social and environmental quality of growth. 

Lower business taxation 

In government, the SNP is determined to deliver a more competitive tax environment for 
Scottish business. Our proposals to reduce business rates will see 120,000 small businesses 
paying no rates and 30,000 with reduced local tax bills. 

We will send a clear signal of our intention to reduce Corporation Tax rates in Scotland in 
stages to 20% when the Scottish government has responsibility for this financial lever. 

Reduce business burdens 

There are three common-sense policies we will follow to minimise business burdens. 
First, we will only introduce regulations once they have been approved by a majority of our 
EU neighbours, unless there is a clear benefit to Scotland of early adoption. Second, we will 
minimise the burden of bureaucracy by ensuring Scottish regulations do not have British 
gold-plating. Finally, we would adopt the Better Regulation Commission’s policy of ‘one in, 
one out’ meaning each new regulation must replace another. 


We also propose that businesses only have to apply for our Small Business Bonus relief once 
every five years as long as the circumstances of the business have not changed, coinciding 
with the revaluation of rateable values. 



Finance and Sustainable Growth 

Widen access to public sector contracts 

We will set a minimum target of 20% of public sector contracts by value to be sourced from 
small and medium sized enterprises. 

Immigration 

We will seek an enhanced role for the Scottish parliament in the Shortage Occupation List. 
We will press the case for a Scottish green-card that is awarded to eager, qualified immigrants, 
who want to come to Scotland for five years or longer. 


More Scots in Better Paid Jobs 

Let Scotland Flourish sets out in full details our ideas for creating the conditions that will see 
more Scots in better paid jobs. 

Refocus the business support network 

As part of our review of Scotland’s agency structure, we will consider the creation of a 
strategic Scottish Enterprise Board. Our aim is to reinvigorate the enterprise network by 
directing attention on key tasks through a trimmer Scottish Enterprise that provides strategic 
direction, while delivery is devolved to more focused agencies. 

We will keep Scottish Development International, with Locate in Scotland and Export from 
Scotland under its umbrella: 

• Locate in Scotland will continue the new emphasis on the Knowledge Economy and our 
world-class universities. 
• Export from Scotland will support individual and collective enterprise by creating market 
awareness for companies and for Scotland, and by helping companies develop and build 
profitable sales and effective marketing capabilities. 
We will protect the independence of HIE and enhance their position within the broader decision 
making structures of the reformed enterprise network. We will begin early consultation on 
extending HIE’s role in relation to community land purchase to cover the whole of the country 
so that their expertise can be available for urban communities in other parts of Scotland. 

We will also consult on proposals to transfer responsibility for local enterprise delivery to 
existing local authority Economic Development Departments. Our aim is to cut back on overlap in 
bureaucracy while maintaining a strong business input into local economic strategy and policy. 


Manifesto 2007 


Tourism 

The promotion of Scotland’s tourism industry will be a key priority for the SNP in government. 
We will bring together responsibility for enterprise, tourism and infrastructure under a single 
minister in the Department of Finance and Sustainable Growth, so that policy as a whole 
reflects the needs and interests of the industry. 

Within the Enterprise structure, Welcome to Scotland will acknowledge Scottish tourism as the 
major industry and employer that it is, linking tourism directly with economic development. 
Welcome to Scotland will deliver a lighter regulatory touch and stronger marketing role, and 
decentralise tourism information and services so that we can better connect areas with their 
visitors. 

Key infrastructure improvements, including investment to reduce rail journey times between 
our major cities and reductions in business rates for small businesses will be of particular 
benefit to the tourism sector. 

We will also support new training for Scotland’s tourism industry to maximise the use of and 
benefit from online marketing and sales opportunities. 

Scottish Investment Fund 

We will make better use of underspends in the Scottish budget to establish a Scottish 
Investment Fund. The annual income will be allocated to encourage business start-ups, fund 
cutting edge research and support the expansion of the social enterprise sector. 

Supporting skills 

We will use the new Skills Committee of the Scottish Funding Council to ensure that the Further 
Education Sector is geared up to deliver the required local and national skills. 

We will align Careers Scotland more closely with the education sector to tackle the extremely 
high number of 16-19 year olds currently not in education, work or training, and deliver a 
greater focus on apprenticeships in key core skills. 

Support innovation and increase access to capital 

We will deliver a series of measures to support access to loans for small businesses, increase 
access to venture capital and provide support for innovators seeking to take their product from 
concept to market place 

We will launch a Saltire prize to promote future innovation and technological endeavour. Set at 
£5 million the aim of the prize would be to encourage and harness Scotland’s creative energy. 
The first Saltire Prize will focus on developing Scotland’s renewable generation capacity. 


Finance and Sustainable Growth 


Easing the Commute 

In government the SNP will be directed by three core principles for future transport projects: 

• Full utilisation of current rail and road network – we believe many parts of our transport 
network require only cost-effective upgrades with moderate investment bringing maximum 
return. 
• Delivering the right infrastructure for business success – transport policy must be 
designed to meet the strategic needs of Scotland’s wealth creators, with a focus on 
delivering a competitive and effective road, rail, sea and air infrastructure which ensures 
all parts of Scotland are open for business. 
• 
A focus on the needs of Scottish commuters – our aim is to make the biggest difference 
for the most number of Scots, which means that we will prioritise projects designed to ease 
the commute, remove bottlenecks and improve the quality of life for people in all parts of 
our country. 
In addition, it is our aim and ambition that year on year the journeys Scots make are greener, 
safer and easier. 

Greener 

By combining responsibility for the environment, transport and sustainable economic growth 
within one department of government we will ensure that our broader commitment to lower 
emissions in Scotland is met, while ensuring we have the necessary infrastructure to allow 
Scotland’s economy to more effectively compete and succeed. 

In government we will set an ambitious target for the use of alternative road fuels, believing 
that this is a crucial step to ensure lower emissions while protecting drivers in rural Scotland 
who can be offered too few effective or viable alternatives to the car. 

We will begin early consultations on the most effective target for the use of bio-fuels and 
hydrogen powered vehicles, and put forward as the starting point for discussion a twin target 
of a 100% use of alternative fuels by public sector vehicles by 2020 combined with a national 
target of 30% for other road users. As part of this commitment, we will examine incentives for 
industry to develop bio-fuels in Scotland and for motorists to make greater use of these lower 
emission fuels. 


Manifesto 2007 


Safer 

In government the SNP will publish a 10-year plan to transform Scottish road safety. The case 
put forward by organisations including the AA motoring trust proves that a range of measures 

– including dualling of key roads, such as the A9 - would contribute to fewer lives being lost. 
We will begin a nation wide debate to identify options to provide greater protection for young 
drivers, involving youth groups, the police and advanced driving experts in this process. 

We will encourage the insurance industry to work with us to offer incentives to young drivers, 
for example lower costs for teenagers who drive only during the day. 

In the long-term we believe better education and enhanced driving skills are key and in 
government we will examine options for extending access to Pass Plus advanced driving for 
young Scots. 

We also propose a specific pilot project to enable Scottish school pupils to sit and pass the 
first theory stage of their driving test in school. We believe this initiative could contribute to 
improved safety and help create a stronger safety culture among young Scots. 

Easier 

A central priority of any national transport policy must be providing maximum benefit for 
Scotland’s commuters. 

Railways - Our railway is nearly full up, that is why we will give the go ahead for the second 
stage increases to capacity at Waverley. And we will ask Network Rail to bring forward 
proposals for: 

• improvements to the Glasgow Queen Street to Edinburgh Waverley so we can reduce the 
journey time on this route 
• extensive electrification of Scotland’s rail network so we can identify and then implement any 
schemes that offer a clear benefit for the travelling public 
• a connection to an overland station at Edinburgh airport, avoiding the additional cost and risk 
of the proposed new hub station under the airport runway 
Our immediate priority however is to improve services for Scotland’s commuters. Our aim is to 
provide more space, more frequent services and faster journey times. That means giving the go 
ahead for a new National Rail Improvement Plan. 


Finance and Sustainable Growth 


We will work with Network Rail following the results of their own consultation around the Rail 
Utilisation Strategy for Scotland to ensure that there is maximum benefit for the estimated 
£300 million investment that will be required to get the most from our current Rail Network. 

We will give the go ahead for the necessary track improvements to cut journey times from 
Inverness to Edinburgh by 45 minutes. 

And for Aberdeen, the best option for a significant time saving is the introduction of tilting 
trains. This has already been achieved on the west coast main line and we will request options 
from Network Rail so we can look to cut as much as 25 or 30 minutes off the journey from the 
North East to the central belt. 

Integrated Public Transport - We will bring together Scotland’s transport stakeholders to take 
forward measures to ensure greater integration of our public transport network and will put 
forward for consideration the development of an integrated payment card. 

Congestion on our roads - We do not believe Labour and Liberal Democrat proposals for a 
Toll Tax – charging motorist a new tax for using Scotland’s roads – is the right approach 
especially as so many Scottish families today do not have adequate access to alternative 
public transport. 

The SNP will aim to decouple ownership and usage of cars. We will persuade and not punish car 
users to use other modes. We will take three specific measures each of which will bring about a 
modal shift: 

• By encouraging the increased use of flexi working in the public sector, and home working. 
Every public sector body will be required within 6 months of our taking office to explain what 
its policy is and what has been preventing it from doing more, and to provide an action plan 
of measures. 
• Park and Ride Schemes have been terrifically successful. The SNP in government will require 
each city to provide its strategy within 6 months of the election showing what they will do to 
enhance Park and Ride provision by bus or train or both, in their area. We will work with Local 
Authorities to ensure every effort is made to fast-track schemes. 
• There should be greater consolidation of delivery services. In government we will work with 
the haulage industry to encourage consolidation of loads when doing deliveries into cities. 
We will also pilot a new scheme to tackle congestion during the school run. In Edinburgh school 
pupils will be given free bus travel before and after school to encourage greater use of public 
transport. This will include £4 million investment in modern buses, as a more effective 
alternative to the Edinburgh Trams scheme. 


Manifesto 2007 


Clearing our transport arteries - Alongside vital investment in our railway network to get the 
best return for our investment and make the most of current infrastructure, an SNP led Scottish 
government will take forward key improvements to nationally significant trunk routes, 
including among others the A9, A96 and A77. We will work closely with Regional Transport 
partnerships to ensure long-term planning for future road improvements. 

A new Forth crossing - Making the right decision on a replacement for the Forth Bridge is the 
most important transport task facing Scotland today. As a bottom line, we must be in a 
position to give early go-ahead for a replacement crossing. We must do all we can to remove 
any risk of a period of closure, with the devastating effect that would have on the economy of 
Scotland and in particular the economy of the east coast and north of our country. 

A new bridge remains an option, however we have concerns about both the construction cost 
and the time it will take from decision to delivery. In government we will do all we can to 
fast-track the planning and parliamentary process. And we will give full consideration to all 
options for the new crossing including a Forth Tunnel. 

Freight industry -We will build on the work of the freight transport inquiry in the Scottish 
Parliament, looking at opportunities to assist the industry and in particular deal with issues 
of congestion. 

A fairer deal for Scotland’s Islands - The benefits of an improved transport network must be 
felt in all parts of Scotland and to this end, the Scottish government will commission a study 
into Road Equivalent Tariff (RET), reporting on options for improved connection to our northern 
and western isles by end of 2007. As part of this we will undertake a pilot project on RET to the 
Western Isles which will include support for freight and tourist journeys. 

International connections - We must be prepared to match the best on offer elsewhere in 
Europe with high-speed or bullet trains connecting our major cities. In government we will 
conduct an early study into options for inter-city high-speed links in Scotland. 

There is a strong case for a fast rail link to London to reduce demand for the current domestic 
shuttle flights to London. We recognise the contribution air travel makes to carbon emissions 
and in this light will aim to promote and encourage an extension of international connections 
alongside practical steps to reduce reliance on internal UK flights. 

We also support the expansion of direct ferry connections from Scotland and will convene an 
early meeting with ferry operators in Scotland to discuss ways an SNP government can support 
the development of these important routes. We see international ferry connections playing a 
part in our wider economic and tourism promotion strategies. 


Finance and Sustainable Growth 


In government we will seek to open discussions with the UK government on the development of 
a high-speed service between Scotland and London, connecting to mainland Europe through the 
Channel Tunnel rail link. 

Improved Delivery 

The SNP is determined to deliver a fast-track system for major infrastructure projects. 

This will include early and full public debate and a requirement on government agencies 
and quangos to meet tight deadlines for their own response to or assessment of projects, 
with agency Chief Executives personally charged with the speedy completion of their bodies’ 
functions. 

For major national transport projects, consultation will be front-loaded and comprehensive. 

We will ensure proper timing of projects so that we can ensure continued capacity at all stages 
of the construction process. We will integrate programmes with a view to a steady release of 
design and construction. This is joined up thinking and will save money. 

We will establish a regular meeting between the industry and private sector civil engineering 
side to discuss practical constraints in order to anticipate problems and manage the process 
taking account of the needs of industry. 

To ensure streamlined delivery, we propose the creation of a preparation pool of projects that 
have been worked up past the design and land purchase stage, ready to go ahead in the event 
of delays. This will provide continuity for the construction industry and for Scottish transport 
users. We are determined to avoid peaks and troughs in available work. 

Minister for Energy and the Environment 

Within the Department for Finance and Sustainable Growth, there will be a particular focus on 
Scotland’s contribution to tackling climate change overseen by our nation’s first Climate Change 
Minister. This Minister for Energy and the Environment will drive forward the following 
departmental priorities: 


Manifesto 2007 


A Greener Scotland 

Protecting and enhancing Scotland’s environment will be central priorities for the SNP in 
government. 

In government we will introduce a Climate Change Bill with mandatory carbon reduction targets 
of 3% per annum and also set a long-term target of cutting emissions by a minimum of 80% by 
2050 – above the UK target of 60%. 

To take forward this commitment, we will assess and then offset the carbon impact of major 
government projects, including much needed improvements to Scotland’s road network. 

No to Nuclear 

As a starting point a Scotland led by the SNP will say no to new nuclear – power stations 
or dumps. An SNP government will make clear that Scotland does not require a new nuclear 
power station. 

We will involve all of Scotland in the preparation of extensive and effective clean energy 
legislation. 

It is important for Scotland that we have comprehensive legislation to take forward our clean 
energy ambitions. We will therefore bring together stakeholders on a cross-party and non-party 
basis so that we can agree a joint approach to clean energy legislation and introduce a bill in the 
second year of government that can attract a consensus in parliament. 

Have the public sector lead the way in best practice 

Government, its agencies and other public bodies including the NHS and Local Authorities have 
a responsibility to take a lead. Together we are responsible for spending a large amount of 
public money and there is no doubt that we have the opportunity to make a big green impact. In 
government the SNP will set out proposals to ensure there is a renewable capability in each 
public building – starting with a commitment to renewable generation in every Scottish school. 

We will also examine options for including environmental and community clauses in public 
procurement contracts. In particular we recognise both the sustainability and nutritional 
advantages of encouraging the sourcing of fresh food in our schools and hospitals. 


Finance and Sustainable Growth 


Energy Saving 

We all have a part to play in meeting the challenge of global warming and so we will establish 
an expert panel to report on the changes we need to make to building regulations in Scotland 
to increase energy efficiency and encourage more local energy production. We will consult on 
proposals to introduce a planning presumption requiring new buildings in Scotland to include 
sufficient renewable generation on-site to deliver between 20% and 50% of energy needs. 

Beyond this, our target must be that new build houses should meet the same rigorous 
standards that exist in Scandinavia, allowing householders to significantly reduce their energy 
use and energy bills. We will consult on setting a new guideline for energy saving in new 
buildings with the aim of reducing their energy footprint by between 20% and 33%. 

In government we will send a clear signal of support and will work with the organisers of 
Glasgow 2014 to ensure that a commitment to zero-carbon athletes’ accommodation is part of 
their bid for the Commonwealth Games. 

We will also examine options to ensure new build schools and hospitals meet the highest 
energy efficiency design standards. 

Improving energy efficiency is central to our task of delivering a greener Scotland and so in the 
first 100 days of the SNP in government we will institute a Scottish Energy Efficiency Design 
Awards to bring together our best designers, the construction and manufacturing industries so 
we can create the best energy efficiency solutions for Scotland. In total £1 million will be 
available in prize money and development incentives so we can turn our best energy saving 
ideas into workable energy efficient products. 

A sustainable approach to flood prevention 

In government we will review the interaction of current flooding legislation to ensure adequate 
access to funding for sustainable flood prevention measures. We believe the inclusion of 
sustainable measures is important to provide long-term solutions to reduce flooding threats 
on Scotland’s rivers. Sustainable flood management techniques, such as planting more trees 
along riverbanks and restoring wetlands, complement traditional engineering solutions. 
They reduce the flow of water and thus lessen the risk of flooding. 


Manifesto 2007 


Towards Zero Waste 

The SNP believe that we must aspire to achieve a zero waste Scotland. We view waste 
prevention as the key. The SNP will begin early consultation with industry and other 
stakeholders to agree national standards. Scotland has come a long way in reducing domestic 
waste. We have a long way to go in tackling commercial waste. 

We welcome the progress made towards household recycling and would wish to extend 
kerbside recycling throughout Scotland. This should include plastics recycling. 
We will investigate the potential to introduce used cooking oil collections for biodiesel and 
kerbside collections for batteries. The SNP will seek to learn from other countries that have 
far better records for recycling. 

Making the most of Scotland’s renewable and green energy potential 

Scotland has extensive renewable energy potential. We will take forward a distinct Scottish 
Energy Policy. 

Involve communities more in renewable energy decisions 

A Scottish energy revolution has greatest chance of success if it comes from the bottom up 
rather than just being imposed from the top down. Community opposition to industrial scale 
wind-farms is just one example. 

We will take forward the creation of Community Energy Plans to allow local communities to 
identify and set their own local renewable needs and then contract with energy suppliers to 
deliver community based energy generation and energy saving solutions. 

Alongside this initiative we will encourage the establishment of community energy companies 
and trusts, with local micro-grids allowing for the decentralisation of energy production. 
Instead of a small number of large generators, our aim is to see an expansion of local 
generation, in particular Combined Heat and Power plants and household generation capacity, 
which together will increasingly meet local energy needs. 

We want more householders contributing to local energy supply and so will remove 
unnecessary planning obstacles that stand in the way of micro-generation. 

In our first Budget for Scotland, the SNP in government will also set out plans to quadruple the 
financial support for family and community micro-generation schemes. As part of this step 
change, we will bring forward plans to support the long-term deployment of energy generation 
or energy saving in 1 million Scottish homes. 


Finance and Sustainable Growth 


Europe’s Green Energy Capital 

In government the SNP will make the creation of an EU wide green energy research centre a 
focus of our external affairs efforts in the EU. The centre, which we propose should be based in 
Aberdeen, would allow us to build on decades of offshore energy expertise and the proximity 
to some of the world’s most promising renewable energy locations - from Peterhead and the 
North Sea for carbon capture and storage to the Pentland Firth, described as the Saudi Arabia 
of tidal power. 

Taking a technological lead 

We want to see Scotland take the lead in providing the engineering solutions that allow for 
the full exploitation of these clean energy sources. As we have indicated earlier, the first 
£5 million Saltire prize will be an opportunity for Scottish and international scientists to 
design and develop the answers we need to take forward these vital technologies and deliver 
workable commercial scale generators around Scotland’s shores. 

Support for Carbon Capture 

An SNP led government will give full backing to proposals to develop cutting edge carbon 
capture and storage schemes so we can generate clean energy from hydrocarbon sources. 
We will support the upgrade of current coal generation with new clean coal technologies. 

A North Sea Super-Grid 

We will begin early discussions with the Norwegian Government and EU Commission on 
co-operation to take forward proposals for an electricity inter-connector linking renewable 
generation off Scottish and Norwegian shores with energy hungry markets in mainland Europe. 

Investment in offshore renewables 

The SNP will continue current investment and look to extend support available for research into 
and the deployment of offshore generation capacity. It is our ambition that Scotland takes the 
lead in these technologies in the way Denmark was able to become the lead nation for onshore 
wind over the last decade. 


Manifesto 2007 


National and Local Planning Progress 

We will begin an early review of planning, including proposals to require Local Authorities to 
take account of renewable energy as part of their local planning process. We will expect each 
Scottish council to assess suitable and appropriate sites for renewable generation in their 
area, with full engagement with communities in this process. This review will include 
assessment of the suitability of infrastructure and grid access. This local initiative will feed 
into a nationwide assessment of renewable sites. 

This one year community and national consultation will allow us to produce a clear national 
strategy on the approach to the planning and siting of renewable generation, allowing us to 
move forward more effectively. Current schemes will continue through the planning process 
during this review. We will also encourage generators to consider expansion of current wind 
sites where this is agreed with the local community. 


Health and Wellbeing 


III. Department of Health and Wellbeing 
Scotland can be healthier, with the benefits felt in higher quality of life for Scottish families 
and communities. 

Our new approach will see vital local health services protected. In hospital you will have your 
own personal and legally guaranteed waiting time. Our commitment is to deliver healthcare 
that is quick and close to home. 

It’s time for fresh thinking to give Scots the support they need to improve their health and 
fitness. It’s time to build on the success of NHS staff and deliver a system that works for 
Scottish patients. 

Health policy should be as much about preventing ill-health as treating it. The SNP will focus 
on improving public health, as well as ensuring good and timely medical treatment. 

We will pay particular attention to reducing health inequalities within Scotland - as well as 
between Scotland and the rest of Western Europe – by expanding primary and preventative 
healthcare services in our most deprived areas. 

And we will do more to empower individuals and communities to have more control over their 
own lives and more choice in how their needs are met. 

34 


Manifesto 2007 


Departmental Priorities 

Building a stronger NHS 

We will make better use of NHS capacity to deliver a better deal for patients. 

By investing in more fast-track diagnostic and treatment centres within the NHS, by giving 
every patient a legally binding waiting time guarantee appropriate for their needs, and by 
providing the right incentives for hospitals to do more, we can drive down waiting times for 
everyone, not just those lucky enough to have a waiting time guarantee - something now 
denied to over one third of patents waiting for treatment. 

Reducing waiting times 

Individuals sometimes need to be treated more quickly than the national waiting time 
guarantees. To ensure this happens we will introduce a Patients Rights Bill to give every 
patient a legally binding waiting time guarantee appropriate for their condition. 

Together with our determination to make better use of NHS capacity, this will enable us to 
deliver a new national waiting time guarantee. We will set a target that no patient should 
wait longer than 18 weeks from GP referral to treatment by the end of 2011. 

We will also ensure that the two-month waiting target for cancer patients to be diagnosed and 
treated is met. 

To further reduce waiting times we will increase the numbers of NHS physiotherapists and 
examine the potential to expand the numbers of other allied health professionals. 

Accessible healthcare 

Working patterns and lifestyles have changed dramatically over the past decades, yet access 
to non-emergency healthcare is still based on office-hours availability. We will work with 
healthcare providers and health boards to deliver more flexible access to health services. 

We will issue new guidance to health boards to reduce excessive charges for car parking and 
other services and review public transport links to hospitals to make sure they are sufficiently 
accessible. 

Access to alternative therapies such as homeopathy can help improve the quality of life of 
patients. We will support patient choice in this respect and encourage GPs to do likewise. 

We will support measures to improve access to independent sexual health information and 
advice services in rural as well as urban areas and support the role of school nurses in 
secondary schools in the delivery of a sexual health strategy. 


Health and Wellbeing 


Local healthcare 

Most people accept that they may have to travel if they need specialist health treatment. 
They also expect to have local access to core services like A&E and maternity services. 
An SNP government will support this expectation by operating a presumption against the 
centralisation of core hospital services. 

We will reverse the decision taken by the current Executive to downgrade the Accident and 
Emergency departments at Monklands and Ayr Hospitals. 

We will make sure that health board plans to change the way services are delivered are 
independently scrutinised before going through a more open consultation process. Health 
boards will have to show that changes will lead to better services and demonstrate how 
redesigned services will operate in practice before they can withdraw existing services. 

To help support local services in the long term we will train more generalist doctors and make 
better use of primary care services, support nurses and other healthcare professionals. 

Local health services are particularly important in rural communities. We will support the 
model of rural general hospitals and consider incentives to encourage people to train in rural 
medicine and commit to working in rural areas. We will ensure that training in specialist rural 
areas medicine is properly supported. 

We will improve the quality of NHS24 by delivering the service through more local mini-centres 
co-located with out-of-hours services in each health board area. 

Accountable healthcare 

Many recent decisions taken by health boards have run counter to the wishes of local 
communities. Sometimes difficult decisions must be made and local people should always be 
at the heart of the process. To ensure this is the case we will introduce direct elections to 
health boards. At least half of health board members will be elected by the public. 
Those elected will be encouraged to serve on their local community health partnership as well 
as the health board. 

Because we believe in a more accountable health service an SNP government will hold a public 
inquiry to find out why people were infected with hepatitis C through NHS treatment. 

Staff safety 

Those who work in the NHS do Scotland proud. They deserve the right to a safe working 
environment without the fear of assault. All too often they face violence and aggression. 
An SNP government will tackle this by extending Emergency Workers legislation to cover all 
NHS staff. 


Manifesto 2007 


Dental care 

Scotland has one of the worst records in Europe for dental health, with children from deprived 
communities being least likely to have regular dental check ups and treatment. We will 
re-introduce a school-based dental service, starting in the most deprived areas. To improve 
general access to NHS dentistry, we will work with the dental profession to solve recruitment 
and retention problems and seek to open a third dental school by expanding the Aberdeen 
Dental Institute. 

Ending the blame culture 

We will replace the current NHS clinical negligence scheme with a no-fault system of 
compensation to help foster a more open and respectful relationship between patients and 
clinical staff. This will help eliminate the blame culture that can inhibit the actions of medical 
staff and deliver fairer, quicker and less costly outcomes. Our NHS Redress Bill will give 
patients an alternative to pursuing a medical negligence claim by introducing a right to redress 
without having to go through a lengthy legal battle. 

Mental health 

Improved early intervention can help prevent the development of serious mental health 
problems and reduce over prescribing of anti-depressants. An SNP government will support 
the development of mental health and wellbeing services, such as counselling and talking 
therapies, in each community health partnership area, backed with ring-fenced funding to 
health boards and local authorities. With this support we aim to reduce the use of anti 
depressants by 10 per cent by 2009. 

Voluntary partnerships 

We will work in partnership with the voluntary sector to support new ways of delivering 
services, including direct payments to service providers. By supporting the voluntary sector 
to provide services such as palliative care we can make an immeasurable improvement to the 
quality of life of patients. 


Health and Wellbeing 

Greater independence through quality care 

The SNP believes that everyone has the right to control their own lives. Care services for 
disabled people and others should help maintain the independence of the individual by giving 
them greater choice over the ways in which their needs are met. 

To support this we will encourage the wider use of direct payments, particularly in groups 
where take-up has been low. We will also trial the development of individual budgets to 
extend the flexibility and choice of services available for people with a disability and who 
have an assessed need for care support. 

Free personal care 

The SNP is committed to delivering free personal and nursing care for the elderly. We will 
ensure it is implemented properly across the country. 

As an immediate priority we will increase the payments for personal and nursing care in line 
with inflation. To secure the policy in the longer term we will establish an independent review 
to investigate both the level and distribution of resources to local authorities, advised by 
Lord Sutherland, chair of the Royal Commission that paved the way for the introduction of free 
personal care. 

We will reopen with Westminster the issue of attendance allowance. When the Scottish 
Parliament introduced free personal care the UK government decided to claw back £40 million 
that was already being paid to pensioners in attendance allowance. That is money that rightly 
belongs in Scotland and we will seek to recover it. 

Residential care 

We will invest an additional £6 million each year to ensure an appropriate availability of care 
home places for those who need residential care. 


Manifesto 2007 


Support for unpaid carers 

The SNP will do more to help the hundreds of thousands of unpaid carers who make such a huge 
contribution to Scotland’s health and wellbeing. We will intensify initiatives to implement the 
conclusions of the Care 21 Report on the Future of Unpaid care in Scotland. 

We will extend direct payments to carers and provide additional funding to provide dedicated 
services to support young carers. 

We will invest in providing training for carers and provide additional funding for the support 
and development of carer organisations across Scotland. 

We will start to improve the provision of respite care by providing sufficient resources for an 
additional 10,000 respite weeks per year, either at home or in a care setting. By 2011 carers in 
greatest need will have a guaranteed annual entitlement to breaks from caring. 

Improving public health 

Government has a responsibility to deliver excellent healthcare free at the point of need 
and individuals also have a responsibility to look after their own health and avoid damaging 
behaviour. 

An SNP government will make it easier for people to take better care of themselves by 
providing personalised advice and information and making healthy choices more accessible. 

Health checks 

To identify health problems early we will introduce annual health and fitness checks in schools, 
delivered by doubling the number of school nurses. School nurses will play a crucial role in 
tackling problems such as childhood obesity through education, working with parents and 
individual intervention. 

To ensure that health problems in later life can be identified we will introduce ‘Life begins’ 
health checks for all men and women when they reach the age of 40, delivered through 
GP surgeries or local health centres. Patients will be given an individual health plan based 
on the findings of their health check with information on any lifestyle changes which may 
be necessary. 

By the end of our first term in government we will aim to extend this initiative to Scots 
reaching retirement age, allowing the right health intervention and support at this important 
time of life. 


Health and Wellbeing 

Protecting against cervical cancer 

An SNP government will offer free vaccination against the most common viruses that cause 
cervical cancer. Subject to the recommendation of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and 
Immunisation, we will make the vaccine available to all girls aged between 12 and 14, through 
a school-based vaccination programme. 

Dementia as a national priority 

An SNP government will ensure dementia is a national priority. We will seek both to increase 
public understanding and help people reduce their risk of dementia. 

It is important that across Scotland public bodies work to the same care standards and an SNP 
government will work with Local Authorities and Health Boards to agree a way forward. 

Prescription charges 

Prescription charges are a tax on ill health and a barrier to good health for many people. 
They are also expensive to administer. An SNP government will immediately abolish 
prescription charges for people with chronic health conditions, people with cancer, and people 
in full time education or training. We will phase out prescription charges for the rest of the 
population by 2012. 

Improving the food we eat 

The SNP supported the introduction of the ‘Hungry for success’ policy to improve school meals 
and we can do more to improve the diet of our children. 

We will pilot free nutritious school meals for pupils in Primary 1-3, starting in areas of 
deprivation, and increase entitlement to free school meals for a further 40,000 children living 
in poverty. 

We will also ensure that all primary school children receive free fruit and provide free fruit for 
pregnant women and pre-school children using the model of market-led pregnancy cards from 
the major supermarkets. 

We will work constructively with food producers and retailers to increase the availability of 
fresh, nutritious and locally produced food - particularly in areas of deprivation - and address 
pricing policies so that healthy food becomes more affordable. 

We will seek clearer labeling and kite marking of foods with a health benefit. As part of this 
process we will consult on replacing the Supermarket Code of Conduct with independent 
regulation to ensure that supermarkets give space to fresh local and seasonal produce. 


Manifesto 2007 


We will examine how the public sector can help promote good eating habits by ensuring food 
procurement policies meet progressively higher nutritional standards, starting in hospitals, 
nurseries and care homes. By making nutritional specifications available to private sector 
workplaces and other institutions we can encourage the private sector to follow suit. 

We will place an upper limit on artificially produced fats (trans-fats) both in food and in oils 
and fats used in the preparation of food. 

Physical activity and sport 

We will expand measures to increase physical activity among children and in the general 
population, including exercise on prescription schemes. Policy will focus on increasing 
participation in grassroots sport, as well as doing more to nurture the sporting stars of 
the future. 

To achieve this, national policy and targets will become a ministerial responsibility, advised 
by sports governing bodies and other organisations involved in physical recreation. We will 
abolish sportscotland and establish the 3 national centres currently run by sportscotland as 
not-for-profit trusts. 

Starting young 

To help Scottish children develop the habit of physical fitness we will ensure that every pupil 
has 2 hours of quality PE each week delivered by specialist PE teachers. We will continue the 
Active Schools Programme and improve it by building greater links between schools and local 
sports clubs and governing bodies. We will establish an innovative sport volunteer programme 
with schools and after school clubs, to introduce youngsters to the range of sporting activities 
available in their areas. 

We will introduce a moratorium on loss or reduction of school playing fields and facilities, 
where there are no equivalent or improved facilities provided, to ensure cheap lets are 
available to sporting and activity groups. We will prioritise making school grounds and 
facilities more accessible after school hours and during weekends. Children will be given free, 
year-round access to council swimming pools. 

Scotland has one of the most spectacular and challenging outdoor environments in the world 
and all of our youngsters should have the opportunity to experience it. We will work towards 
a guarantee of 5 days outdoor education for every school pupil. To start this process, we will 
provide an additional £250,000 each year to support the expansion of 5 days subsidised 
outdoor education targeted at children from our most deprived communities. 


Health and Wellbeing 


We will strengthen national planning guidelines to give greater protection to green spaces for 
sport and informal recreational activity, particularly in urban and deprived communities. We 
will work with local authorities and the voluntary sector to develop an effective play strategy 
to increase the range of quality play opportunities for children and young people in every part 
of Scotland. 

Supporting sporting excellence 

To nurture future sporting success we will expand the number of centres of sporting excellence 
in Scotland, based on the model of the Bellahouston School of Sport in Glasgow. We will ensure 
that the Regional Institutes of Sport and sports governing bodies work closely with the 
designated schools to provide seamless support to young athletes throughout their school 
years and beyond. This will enable young athletes competing at elite level to receive 
specialised training in an educational setting, so that students can combine training with 
academic learning. 

We will task the Scottish Institute of Sport with the primary responsibility for the elite athlete 
programme. The Institute will work with the Regional Institutes of Sport, sports governing 
bodies and others to support our elite athletes and ensure sporting success for them and for 
Scotland. 

International teams and competitions 

The SNP has been 100 per cent behind Glasgow’s bid to win the 2014 Commonwealth Games. 
In government we will continue to back the bid to bring the Games to Scotland. 

We will launch a feasibility study into the possibility of Scotland bidding for the 2016 
European Football Championships and pursue access to more international sporting events 
for Scottish teams. This will give the maximum number of Scottish athletes the opportunity 
to compete on the international stage and assist in developing sport throughout Scotland. 

Improving community sports facilities 

Lack of community facilities is the biggest barrier to participation in sport and physical 
activity for all age groups. We will work with local authorities to develop local facility 
strategies to deliver community sports facilities fit for 21st century and ensure that school 
facilities can become part of community sports provision. 

We will give more direct financial support to sports clubs and sports governing bodies to 
improve their club facilities. Funding will be targeted through a national Sports Facilities Fund. 
To receive funding, local projects will be required to demonstrate community involvement and 
access as well as a focus on improving public health. 


Manifesto 2007 


Physical activity in daily life 

Being physically active is not just about participating in organised activities, it is also about 
the way we live our daily lives. We will promote simple everyday activities like walking, cycling 
and playing. This will help reduce carbon emissions as well as improving physical fitness. 

Reducing smoking 

The ban on smoking in enclosed public places was a major step forward for Scotland and more 
can be done to reduce smoking levels. We will raise the smoking age to 18, promote the 
introduction of plain packaging and photographic warnings on tobacco products and enforce 
legislation prohibiting the sale of tobacco to people who are under age more strictly. 

Reducing alcohol misuse 

Irresponsible drinking poses major health risks for individuals and demands effective action 
from government. An SNP government will do more to address public concerns about licensing 
laws and the advertising, availability and affordability of alcohol. 

Working with the industry, we will deliver clearer labeling of the unit content on alcoholic 
products, with health and sensible drinking messages included. 

Working with local authorities, we will make sure that every school operates an effective 
alcohol education programme, starting in primary schools. 

SNP justice policy will ensure a tough clampdown on irresponsible drinks promotions and 
underage drinking, including action to stop the deep discounting of alcohol in shops and 
supermarkets. It is not acceptable that a bottle of water can be more expensive than alcohol. 
This sends entirely the wrong health message to young Scots, as well as contributing to 
alcohol-fuelled anti-social behaviour. 

A longer term drugs strategy 

There are no short term fixes to the problems of drug misuse in Scotland. That is why an SNP 
government will establish a national Drugs Commission to develop and agree a long term 
national strategy backed up by a more robust evidence base. 

SNP justice policy will deliver tough action against the drugs dealers. 

We will increase counselling and support services for addicts, with a 20 per cent increase in 
funding for drug treatment and rehabilitation programmes. We will seek to extend access to 
abstinence programs to the whole of Scotland and to ensure that treatment is accompanied by 
employability support to help those escaping a chemical lifestyle move on successfully. 

Schools are often the first line of defence in the fight against drug abuse. An SNP government 
will restore ring-fenced funding for drugs education, with £10 million of dedicated funding for 
drugs education in classrooms. 


Health and Wellbeing 


A new focus on the needs of Scotland’s communities 

Good health is about more than physical fitness, it is also about quality of life. The homes we 
live in, the environment we work in and the extent to which we feel in control of our own lives 
have a vital impact on our sense of wellbeing 

Reducing poverty and dependency 

Scotland has one of the highest levels of income inequality in Western Europe. Too many 
deprived areas suffer from persistent inter-generational poverty and dependency, damaging 
the health and limiting the life chances of the individuals who live there. 

Inequality on this scale is a sign of serious political and economic failure. Reducing poverty 
and dependency will be an SNP priority. 

As part of our drive to grow the Scottish economy we will set specific targets to increase the 
proportion of national wealth held by the each of the lowest six income deciles. We can ensure 
that the benefits of economic growth are shared by all. 

Post-independence we plan to develop a fully integrated tax and benefit system to guarantee 
every citizen a minimum income, remove financial barriers to work, and help people lift 
themselves out of poverty. Prior to independence we will work to reduce dependency by 
improving educational and economic opportunities, particularly in areas of deprivation. 

We will also seek responsibilities to tackle Scotland’s spiralling levels of personal debt by 
establishing a Scottish Lenders Code of Conduct that sets minimum standards of lending 
practices with appropriate safeguards against exploitation. This would provide consumers 
with greater protection against unscrupulous lenders. 

Communities in control 

The SNP’s aim is to give individuals, families and communities more control of their own destiny. 
We will opt for de-centralist policy solutions that devolve power to local level wherever that is 
possible and seek ways to devolve power from local authorities to community level. 


Manifesto 2007 


New powers for communities 

We will review the role of community councils to make them more responsive, dynamic and 
representative. Devolving greater responsibilities to community councils will be a central 
consideration of this review. 

We will consult on proposals to make new local government ward boundaries the structural 
basis for new community councils, with increased powers. These powers could include directing 
a portion of current local spending in their area. As a starting point the consultation will seek 
views on a figure of £30,000 for every 1000 Scots or £300,000 for a community of 10,000 
people – approximately the size of Fort William. 

We particularly want to empower Scots living in areas of deprivation. We will pilot a community 
empowerment scheme giving deprived communities the ability to opt for empowered status, 
allowing local people to co-manage a proportion of public spending and services. We believe 
that this will deliver better outcomes and build community capacity and self-reliance, enabling 
people in disadvantaged communities to have more control of their own futures. 

More community level management and ownership 

We will consult on measures to enable new models of community management of facilities 
within local authority control, such as parks or libraries, to ensure that local people get the 
best use out of them. We will also consider ways to transfer under-used public assets into 
community ownership without the need for ministerial approval, where community benefit can 
be clearly demonstrated. 

Volunteering communities 

Volunteers make an enormous contribution to the lives of individuals and communities across 
Scotland. An SNP government will seek to extend the involvement of the voluntary sector as 
co-producers of public services and drivers of community development. 

We will conclude and implement the strategic funding review to progress sustainable three 
year funding and full cost recovery as soon as is practicable. 

We will work with the sector and regulatory and monitoring bodies to develop a charter of 
best practice to regulate the activities of voluntary organisations which minimises barriers to 
volunteering. 


Health and Wellbeing 


Housing 

Everyone should be able to have a secure, warm home at a cost they can afford. For many 
in Scotland today that remains out of reach. The Scottish Parliament has passed a raft of 
legislation to tackle homelessness and improve the quality of Scottish housing. Now it’s time 
to deliver. 


An SNP government will give particular help to first time buyers who are struggling to afford a 
home of their own. We have already announced plans to introduce a first time buyers’ grant of 
£2,000, to help with the costs and outlays of buying their first home. 


We will provide additional support with the creation of a Scottish Housing Support Fund to 
work in partnership with lenders to provide loans to first time buyers on a shared equity basis. 
The Scottish Housing Support Fund will assist over a thousand additional first time buyers into 
the housing market each year. By reinvesting the returns made on the loans it gives to assist 
future first time buyers it will become self financing over time. 


The SNP recognises the acute shortage of affordable homes in many areas of Scotland. 
We value the community rented sector provided by local authorities and housing associations 
and will assist them to identify need and ensure that the house building and improvement 
programme is appropriate to local needs. 


We will require all public authorities to identify surplus land suitable for house building and 
encourage local authorities to make greater use of the planning process to ensure that house 
building permissions are appropriate to the housing needs of their communities. We will expect 
that a minimum of 25 per cent of all new housing developments are reserved for affordable 
housing. 


We will review current right to buy legislation – while protecting the rights of existing tenants 


– to make it more responsive to local needs. We will ensure that any new build community 
housing is not sold for less than the valuation placed on it by a District Valuer. 
We will transfer the functions of Communities Scotland that can be appropriately delivered 
locally to local authorities, while retaining a national regulatory and monitoring framework for 
Registered Social Landlords. 

Inadequate water and sewerage capacity is currently restricting new housing developments. 
We will take action to remove the barriers which impede investment in water and sewerage 
infrastructure where this is necessary. 


Manifesto 2007 


Building standards 

The SNP will improve the enforcement of building regulations. We will give clear political 
direction to the Scottish Building Standards Agency to provide stronger leadership and consult 
on proposals to ensure that completion certificates comply with regulations by requiring 
sign-off of work by a professional with professional liability. 


Education, Skills, Culture and Arts 

IV. Department for Education, Skills, Culture and Arts 
The SNP wants to deliver more opportunities for Scots to succeed. 


Our approach will see a new emphasis on children’s early years, with an increase in free 
nursery education and smaller class sizes in primary schools. 
We will work with education professionals to stretch every child to achieve their full potential, 


providing them with the individual attention and support they need to flourish. 


We will pay particular attention to raising the achievement of the poorest performing 20 per 
cent of school pupils, with increased early intervention and support. 
We recognise and respect the crucial role of education professionals in this vital task. 
We believe that access to further and higher education should be based on the ability to learn, 


not the ability to pay. We will deliver a return to free education. 
And we will deliver more targeted support for Scotland’s creative community to boost success 
and maximise the economic potential of the cultural sector. 


48 


Manifesto 2007 


Departmental Priorities 

Building firm foundations 

Children and young people 

An SNP government will tackle early the things that hold children back in later life, with a 
focus on delivering high quality integrated services for children and families. Creating more 
joined-up services will ensure that children’s needs are at the centre of policy and provision. 
We will consider the impact on children in all areas of policy development and legislation. 

We support the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. We believe that 
asylum seeker children have the same rights as other children. 

Supporting families 

Children do best in a strong and supportive family environment. 

Getting the right work-life balance is important for families. We want to see all parents and 
carers having the right to request flexible working. We will promote more home and flexi 
working in the public sector and encourage the private sector to follow suit. 

Making life easier 

We will seek to extend access to high quality, affordable and flexible childcare services which 
match children’s needs and parents’ working patterns. We will increase the provision of free 
nursery education for 3 and 4 year olds by 50 per cent, with families benefiting from longer 
hours of free provision. 

Our long term goal is to deliver universal integrated early education and care services, similar 
to the Scandinavian model, giving every family access to affordable, high quality childcare and 
support from the end of maternity leave. In the short term we will look at what we can do to 
support the increasing number of grandparents providing childcare for grandchildren under 3. 


Education, Skills, Culture and Arts 


The right support 

Sometimes families need help when there are problems at home. We will work to ensure that 
parents can access information and support services in every community in Scotland. We will 
also seek to ensure that support services are more widely available for the families of drug 
addicts and for the families of those who misuse alcohol. 

Involving the wider family in decisions about children can reduce the number of children taken 
into care. We will work to expand kinship care, where that is possible, and expand family 
group conferencing from the local authorities which currently use it out to the whole country. 

We will develop improved national support for foster carers and make sure better and more 
responsive support is made available to looked-after children. 

Protecting all our children 

Children should live in a secure environment, free from fear. Protecting children will be a 
priority for an SNP government. 

We will monitor the implementation and effectiveness of recent legislation on child protection 
and disclosure and review and amend it if necessary. 

We will introduce legislation to improve Scotland’s important and distinctive Children’s 
Hearing system. 

We will make sure that all agencies share information and intervene promptly to identify and 
support children at risk. And we will review the funding of children’s services to ensure that it 
meets need and that there is greater integration of service delivery, putting the child at the 
heart of the system. 

Giving children and young people a voice 

Children and young people have the right to have their needs taken into account and their 
views listened to when decisions are taken that affect them. 

We will encourage community planning partnerships to engage young people in their areas and 
deliver a Youth Strategy to promote better opportunities and activities for young people. 

We support reducing the voting age to 16 to allow young people to exercise their democratic 
rights. 


Manifesto 2007 


Providing improved opportunities to learn 

An early start is the best start 

High quality early years education helps to give children a head start in life, particularly in 
communities where opportunities are limited by other factors. 

We will increase the provision of free nursery education for 3 and 4 year olds by 50 per cent. 
That means increasing the entitlement from 400 hours a year to 600 hours a year. We are 
concerned at the removal of nursery teachers from nurseries in some council areas. We will 
deliver access to a fully qualified nursery teacher for every nursery age child, starting with 
children in deprived communities. 

Early intervention, identification of need and provision of service is essential for children who 
have additional support needs. We will require agencies to work together to deliver this. 

We will promote the nurture groups that have proved successful in improving the attainment 
and behaviour of children in the early years of primary. 

Working with teacher training colleges we will begin to develop a flexible, dedicated ‘Early 
years development’ teaching degree. 

Platform for success 

Early intervention, identification of need and provision of service is essential for children who 
have additional support needs. We will require agencies to work together to deliver this. 

We propose to create an Additional Support Fund to improve services for children with 
additional support needs, for example dyslexia and autism. This £10 million fund will be 
focused on providing continuous professional development for teachers. It will also ensure that 
initial teacher training emphasises early identification of additional support needs and that 
specialist training is rolled out to each and every teacher in Scotland. 

We will also review the operation and implementation of mainstreaming of children with 
additional support needs to make sure that children receive the support they need. 


Education, Skills, Culture and Arts 


Smaller class sizes in P1-P3 

We will reduce class sizes in Primary 1, 2 and 3 to eighteen pupils or less to give children more 
time with their teacher at this vital stage of their development. 

Headteachers will have the power to decide on the most appropriate class sizes in later years, 
within national guidelines. We will maintain teacher numbers in the face of falling school 
rolls to cut class sizes and place greater emphasis on teacher recruitment for the early years, 
languages and science. 

Smaller class sizes and increased early intervention will help tackle indiscipline in schools 
and ensure that pupils and teachers enjoy the right conditions for learning throughout their 
careers. 
We will also examine models of single teacher support in S1 to tackle behaviour and guidance 
issues. 

A modern Scottish curriculum 

We will place science, modern languages and technology at the heart of education. Scottish 
history, culture and heritage will be embedded in school life to provide a Scottish world view. 
This will include the teaching of enterprise skills. 

We will support teachers to expand personalised learning in every school to allow children to 
make progress at a pace that suits their individual abilities. 

We will provide opportunities for all pupils to experience vocational education by expanding 
school-college partnerships for 14 – 16 year olds. Vocational skills will have parity of esteem 
with academic qualifications. 

We will provide leadership and drive to promote the Curriculum for Excellence agenda. We will 
cut over-assessment and bureaucracy which gets in the way of quality teaching and learning. 

We will investigate the option of elective time in the school week, to free up time for 
vocational opportunities and allow pupils to pursue interests such as creative arts, community 
volunteering or sport. 

We will ensure that children’s education has a European and international dimension, with a 
greater emphasis on modern foreign languages to extend horizons and widen opportunities in 
later life. 

We will introduce a Scottish Science Baccalaureate and a Scottish Language Baccalaureate, 
initially as group awards, recognising high attainment in a number of Highers and Advanced 
Highers. We will examine the case for introducing the International Baccalaureate. 


Manifesto 2007 


Learning about citizenship 

We will help schools engage pupils in citizenship education which teaches them to understand 
their responsibilities towards the environment, prepares them to play a full part in society and 
promotes a culture of respect and tolerance. 

We will encourage every pupil to learn about the institutions and governance of their country, 
as well as the EU and other supranational bodies. 

Financial and housing education will ensure that young people are equipped with skills for life. 

We will pilot an initiative to allow 17 year old pupils to take the theory part of the driving test 
at school to equip them with road safety knowledge they will need in later life. 

Indiscipline 

We will produce new guidelines to help schools establish peaceful working and learning 
environments. Smaller classes and early intervention will help improve behaviour. As part of 
our citizenship agenda we will provide advice to tackle bullying in all its forms, including racial 
and homophobic bullying, violence and anti-social behaviour. 

Schools will be able to set local policies on issues such as abuse of mobile phones, uniform 
and exclusion. 

Schools at the heart of communities 

We will match the current school building programme brick for brick, and offer an alternative 
funding mechanism through the Scottish Futures Trust. With better value bonds we can release 
more money to invest in the frontline. And with buildings held in trust, local communities will 
have better access to use school facilities. 

We will work with local authorities to develop more schools as community hubs, providing outof-
school activities and, where possible, family, childcare and other community services on site. 

Access to a local school is particularly important in rural communities. We will introduce a 
legislative presumption against closure of rural schools and tighten the regulations for closing 
all schools. 

We will ensure that our education system meets the distinctive needs and interests of all of 
our communities. The SNP will continue to support denominational schools as long as parents 
want them. We will guarantee in law the right to a Gaelic medium education at primary level, 
where reasonable demand exists, and actively pursue the Gaelic teacher strategy. 


Education, Skills, Culture and Arts 


Creating a springboard for life through Higher and further education 

Access to education should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. 

An SNP government will abolish the Graduate Endowment tuition fee and replace the expensive 
and discredited Student Loans system with means-tested student grants. We will remove the 
burden of debt repayments owed by Scottish domiciled and resident graduates. We will 
promote widening access to Higher and Further education in Scotland encouraging and 
creating opportunities for people who may not have been able to access continuing education 
previously. 

We will review the situation of part-time and post-graduate students and support efforts to 
attract more international students. 

We recognise the key role colleges play in the economy and in their communities and will help 
them develop this role as part of a revitalised life-long learning agenda. Our universities 
compete on a global basis in research and development, and we need to provide more 
government support for them to continue to do so as a key driver in Scotland’s economic and 
enterprise agenda. That is why we will allocate an additional £10 million to support cutting 
edge research in Scotland. 

We will also support the creation of a Scottish Life Sciences Institute. We believe such 
an Institute could play an important role in retaining and attracting the best scientists to 
Scotland and would act as a magnet for excellence in this important area of 
scientific research. 

A skilled workforce 

By getting it right in schools and other educational institutions we can ensure that more 
people have the qualities and skills that employers are looking for. That means we can save a 
great deal of time and money on remedial action in the post-school environment. 

We will aim to ensure that people of all ages can access relevant, valued and quality assured 
training opportunities throughout their working lives to keep pace with the rapidly changing 
demands of the global economy. We will work with employers to help them with the practical 
support they need to tackle skills shortages and work with national agencies, training 
agencies, the voluntary sector and local community enterprises to promote activities which 
help increase the employability of individuals. 


Manifesto 2007 


We will focus our skills strategy on real, marketable skills and ensure that the strategy is 
demand-led. We will review the modern apprenticeships programme to make sure that the 
skills being taught match skills gaps and that the system is flexible enough to encourage 
the maximum participation. In particular, we will aim to increase the number of small 
businesses taking part. In the long term, we will seek to relax the age restrictions on modern 
apprenticeships so that older workers can benefit from the programme too. 

Supporting culture and creativity 

The SNP wants to see a culturally cosmopolitan Scotland, capable of attracting and retaining 
gifted people, where our creative community is supported and their contribution to the 
economy is maximised. 

The creative industries already generate more than £5 billion of turnover in the Scottish 
economy and we think they could do even better with the right support. Scotland has talent in 
abundance and we need to work harder at supporting success. We will introduce a range of 
measures to benefit emerging and existing artists. 

Supporting Scottish artists 

The SNP favours the introduction of a limited tax exemption scheme for artists. At present the 
Scottish Parliament does not have the fiscal powers to deliver this directly. We will therefore 
introduce a new grant enabling artists to reclaim the cost of the tax paid on work they have 
sold up to a maximum of £15,000. 

We will also expand the range of funding options available to artists. As well as non-repayable 
grants we will introduce a system of loans. A third type of funding will be made available in 
the form of the government taking a stake in the artist’s next work, with the government’s 
share of any profits being reinvested in the creative sector. 

We will transfer the budgets for the creative industries from Scottish Enterprise to Creative 
Scotland. 

We will also explore modelling the film tax incentives that have been successful in Ireland, 
Canada and the United States, to bring more film production to Scotland. 


Education, Skills, Culture and Arts 


Supporting Scotland’s Festivals 

The Edinburgh Festivals are crucial to attracting tourists and showcasing Scottish talent on the 
international stage. The SNP will do more to support Scottish artists by creating a new 
£2million 'Edinburgh Festival Expo Fund' to promote Scottish work at the Festivals. The Expo 
fund will help support the costs of new productions, events or exhibitions which involve 
Scottish-based participants that are premiered at any of the Edinburgh Festivals and could also 
be used to support touring of events or performances after their premiere at the festival. 

We will also do more to promote our distinctive national identity and attract tourists on a year 
round basis. We will mobilise our national days - St Andrew's Day, Hogmanay and Burns Night 

- for the benefit of the Scottish economy by the promotion of a Scottish Winter Festival. 
As part of this we will make St Andrew's Day a full national holiday, celebrating the best of our 
traditional and contemporary culture. 
Widening access to the arts 

Culture is not just the domain of professional practitioners. We want to see access to, and 
participation in, cultural activities being as wide as possible. We will promote this by ensuring 
that local authorities include cultural activities within the community planning process. 

Broadcasting 

Scotland needs a dedicated news service and more quality programming made in Scotland. 
An SNP government will push for the devolution of broadcasting powers to the Scottish 
Parliament. 

Currently Scotland generates 8.8% of BBC revenues in licence fees and only receives 5.7% of 
the revenues raised. We want BBC Scotland to retain more of the licence fee raised in Scotland. 
This would allow it to determine its own broadcasting priorities and increase investment in 
programme-making in Scotland, while retaining access to the rest of the BBC network. 

As a very minimum we will demand the creation of a Scottish news service. Devolution has 
resulted in significant divergences in policy and practice north and south of the Border. 
This must be reflected in news coverage. 

We will encourage programme-makers, in both the BBC and independent sectors, to do more to 
market and promote Scotland’s distinctive culture internationally. There is great potential to 
make better use of events such as the Edinburgh Festival or Celtic Connections to target the 
global market, particularly the Scottish diaspora. 

We will monitor the operation of the Gaelic digital channel to ensure that it brings economic as 
well as cultural benefits, to the islands in particular, and push to make it available on freeview. 


Manifesto 2007 


Scotland’s languages 

An SNP government will focus on increasing the place of Gaelic in education, improving the 
status of the language throughout Scotland and supporting Gaelic speaking communities. 

To stabilise the language we will set a target of ensuring that by the 2021 census, the 
proportion of Gaelic speakers is back up to 2001 levels at the very least. We will also set a 
target to expand the number of children in Gaelic medium education within our first term. 

We will promote an increased awareness of Scots and its literature. This will include 
introducing a question on Scots in the census and ensuring that European obligations to 
develop the language are honoured. We will actively encourage the use of Scots in education, 
broadcasting and the arts. 

Safeguarding our heritage 

Current legislation on built heritage is complex and piece-meal, with significant gaps. For 
example, there is no statutory protection for battlefield sites in Scotland. An SNP government 
will conduct a full review and consultation on the legislation covering heritage protection, with 
a view to bringing forward a Heritage Bill in the next session of Parliament. 

We will reduce duplication by merging the ‘Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical 
Monuments of Scotland’ into ‘Historic Scotland’. 


Justice 

V. Department of Justice 
Scottish families and communities can be safer. Our new approach will see more police on 
Scottish streets. We believe that this more visible police presence will reassure communities 
and deter the criminals. It is an investment that will provide wider benefits and will be a key 
element of the SNP’s justice plans. 

We will place responsibility at the heart of the department’s activities. Individuals must accept 
that their actions have consequences. People are tired of excuses for bad behaviour and it is 
time that we dealt firmly and effectively with the crime and anti-social behaviour that disrupts 
the lives of too many of our citizens. 

Scotland as a whole and Scotland’s government must also take responsibility for all our 
communities and seriously address the issues that are too often the driving force behind – 
never a justification for - crime and anti-social behaviour – drink, drugs and deprivation. 
It is a phrase tarnished by 10 years of disappointment, and yet it remains true today - we must 
address crime and the causes of crime. 

Departmental Priorities 

A stronger focus on safer communities 

More Police on Local Streets 

There is no doubt we could be doing more to fight crime and make Scotland’s communities 
safer. Creating a safer Scotland will be a top priority for the Department of Justice, with all 
our actions focused on cutting crime and reducing the fear of crime. 

It is essential that we have sufficient police on local streets. That’s why we will set out plans 
in our first Budget for Scotland for 1000 more police and will encourage Chief Constables to 
focus these new resources on community policing. We want to see these new police officers 
becoming part of the fabric of communities and through local knowledge and by building 
strong relationships with families and businesses in the local area, they will be in a better 
position to deter crime, solve crime and make you and your family feel safer as you go about 
your daily business. 

Visible policing plays a vital role in reducing the fear of crime, which can be as destructive as 
the level of crime, which is why we are putting the emphasis on front line police. 

58 


Manifesto 2007 


Increased public protection 

Guns, air weapons and the Protection of Local Communities 

There are too many guns – and in particular airguns - in Scotland and too many Scottish 
communities where these weapons cause fear and real harm. Where the Liberal/Labour 
Executive have failed to act and passed the buck to Westminster, we will seek specifically 
Scottish solutions. 

Current government proposals are entirely inadequate to address this serious problem in 
Scotland. It is no longer good enough for Scotland to sit back and wait for our neighbours to 
decide on a solution. Instead Scotland must take responsibility itself. 

An SNP government will begin early negotiations with the government in London to have 
powers over firearms repatriated to Scotland. This will free our parliament to produce 
legislation that deals with specific firearms issues. In particular, we propose a move away 
from the piecemeal legislation of today with a consolidated Firearms Act designed for Scottish 
needs and Scottish circumstances. 

We need determined action to combat the dangers of airgun misuse. It is not enough to simply 
restrict the sale of airguns. We will introduce strict conditions on who can acquire airguns 
and where they can be used. An SNP led government will introduce a strict licensing scheme, 
covering the sale, purchase and use of airguns. This is the only effective way of dealing with 
this problem. 

Sex Offenders and the Protection of Young Scots 

We propose a new approach to strengthen the current system for dealing with serious sex 
offenders in our communities. We believe the protection of young Scots is the top priority and 
favour new rights for communities to be told when a paedophile poses a threat. 

If a dangerous sex offender goes underground we will ask the police and local Procurator Fiscal 
to take the lead and do what is necessary to apprehend. This will include releasing the name 
and photograph of the offender to the community. 

If a child goes missing, then there will be a tough response with sex offenders in the area 
visited, and if necessary premises searched, without a warrant. 

There will be a traffic light system, with the police and Procurator Fiscal able to trigger a ‘red 
alert’ in a variety of circumstances in which case there would be all necessary steps to protect 
the local community. For amber, where there is some concern about a sex offender’s behaviour, 
key organisations in a community will be informed. For example, these might include the local 
schools or a local swimming pool. The green light would only be applied for the range of less 
serious offences and where there was no assessed risk. The current arrangements would apply 
in these cases. 


Justice 


More Say for Communities in Anti-Social Behaviour Orders 

Labour say vandalism is anti-social behaviour, we believe it is a crime. We believe anti-social 
behaviour orders should not be used when the criminal justice system is a more appropriate 
way of dealing with offenders. 

Putting more police into local communities and our new focus on tough community punishments 
will help move the focus more effectively onto police deterrence and strong action against low 
level criminal activities that reduce the quality of life for too many people across Scotland. 

In government we will look to review and improve the working of the system of ASBOs and as 
part of this, will consult on giving revamped community councils a greater role in the process 
of applying for anti-social behaviour orders. 

Tackling the causes of crime 
A clamp down on underage sales 

It’s time to get tough on the irresponsible sale of alcohol. Alcohol fuels the anti-social 
behaviour that blights too many communities. The SNP will hit hard off-licenses that sell to 
and adults who buy for under-18s. There are no excuses for the sale of booze to young Scots. 
The sale of alcohol to underage Scots will result in the loss of a premises’ license and buying 
alcohol for under-18s will lead to prosecution. 

The Home Office estimates that 40% of violent crime, 78% of assaults and 88% of criminal 
damage offences were committed when the offender was under the influence of alcohol. For 
many communities the biggest problems relate to excessive drinking on the streets and not the 
more regulated alcohol consumption in local bars. 

As long as retailers are allowed to use deep discounting of alcohol as a method of undercutting 
competitors and luring customers into stores over consumption of alcohol and frequent binge 
drinking will remain a part of our culture. Concrete action is needed in this area if the damage 
alcohol does to our society is to be reversed. 

Extend national licence conditions to the off trade. 

Irresponsible drinks promotions in pubs and clubs are to be outlawed via national licence 
conditions set by central government, yet no such action is being taken with regard to the off 
trade. This anomaly can be rectified by ministers using the powers granted to them to set 
national licence conditions for the off trade. Such conditions would include the banning of 
irresponsible drinks promotions - that is those that sell alcohol at very cheap prices and/or 
large amounts of alcohol at deep discounts. 


Manifesto 2007 


Strict penalties for supermarkets that flout licence conditions 

Of course, if using Licensing conditions to ensure supermarkets sell and promote alcohol in a 
responsible manner are to be effective, then strict sanctions must be in place for those that 
flout the law. 

The 2005 Licensing Act has introduced both tough sanctions and a proper policing system to 
ensure pubs and clubs meet their social responsibilities when selling alcohol. Under the Act, 
each Local Authority must employ Licensing Standards Officers to police the system and 
ensure publicans are selling alcohol in a responsible manner. Should a pub or a club fail to do 
so, the Licensing Boards have far reaching powers to clamp down on them, including changing 
the conditions of the existing licence, suspending the licence for as long as they see fit, 
or revoking the licence altogether. 

However, these powers do not extend to the off trade, meaning supermarkets are free to 
continue the deep discounting of alcohol. Under the regulations of the Licensing Act, the 
Scottish Executive has the power to extend both the policing role and the Licensing Board 
sanctions to include the off-license trade. In government the SNP will use the powers 
available to, first, extend the role of the Licensing Standards Officers to include the policing 
of supermarkets and second, widen the jurisdiction of the Licensing Boards so they can 
impose the same sanctions on supermarkets that sell alcohol irresponsibly as they can with 
pubs and clubs. 

Going after organised crime 

The SNP in government will come down hard on serious and organised crime. 

While the steps forward already taken through the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement 
Agency and the Serious Organised Crime Agency are welcome, our concern is that current 
efforts are too one dimensional. Looking to the most successful models overseas it is clear 
Scotland would benefit from a more joined up approach, with the full range of necessary 
expertise brought together as part of a new Serious Crime Taskforce. 

Our proposal would add new strength and depth to current efforts, with police investigations 
supported by dedicated prosecutors and specialists including forensic accountants, IT and 
corporate law experts. 

We want to build the broadest and most effective enquiry and prosecution team to maximise 
the chance of success in any investigation and success in identifying and seizing the assets of 
these criminal organisations. 


Justice 


Offering an escape route 

As part of our wider commitment to the right intervention we will reinstate the Airborne 
scheme and also support the further development of work-based mentoring for young Scots, 
along the lines of the Working Rite model. 

The re-offending rate for offenders who took part in the Airborne Initiative was 21%, compared 
to 79% for those sent to prison. And Airborne proved to be good value for money for the tax 
payer in comparison to prison. When it was operating at full capacity, Airborne cost £116 per 
place per week, compared to £574 per week for a prison place at the time. 

The SNP strongly supports efforts, such as the Pathfinder programme, to provide young 
people who risk not reaching their full potential, with opportunities for learning and personal 
development. 

Such early intervention schemes have an important part to play in the wider battle against 
anti-social behaviour and in government the SNP will look to expand provision in this area by 
making this a priority area as additional funding emerges. 

Ensuring the most appropriate sentencing, punishment and 
rehabilitation 

A Scottish Sentencing Council 

Public confidence is an integral part of any well functioning and effective criminal justice 
system. No matter how well a system operates, if the perception of it amongst the general 
public is negative then it is fundamentally undermined. 

That’s why the SNP will update and improve the current arrangements to provide greater 
consistency and transparency in the decisions of our courts. 

The public are confused by the methods courts use to sentence criminals and believe, often 
with good reason, that similar offences result in significantly different sentences. Many within 
the criminal justice system share that belief. 

Our solution is to create a new Sentencing Council to provide sentencing guidelines for the 
Judiciary. This will increase consistency, fairness and transparency in sentencing so that there 
is increased public confidence that justice is being done. 

The final decision on a sentence based on the facts of the case would be for the Judge or 
Sheriff. The guidelines set by the Council will show the tariff to be applied and the sentence 
our communities expect to be imposed. 


Manifesto 2007 


If a Judge or Sheriff wished to impose a sentence outwith the guidelines there would have to be 
some good reason to justify such an action. They would need to state on the record the specific 
reasons for doing so and in the few cases where a sentence falls outwith the guidelines it 
would be subject to Appeal by the Prosecution. 

The SNP believes there should be an end to the automatic release of offenders. We support 
the recent legislation in this area and in government will drive forward this important area 
of reform. 

Tough Community Punishments 

The SNP propose a marked shift away from short custodial sentences to tough 
community-based punishments. Community based punishment serves the vital purpose of 
punishing a criminal for their offence, and has the added benefit of the offender repaying his 
debt to society directly to the community that has been harmed. 

In addition, community punishment forces the offender to face up to their underlying 
problems, meaning re-offending is less likely and making society safer in the long term. 
This is considerably harder than sitting in a prison cell for a couple of months, often doing 
nothing more than learning the ‘tricks’ of the criminal trade. 

The prime objective of our reforms will be to tackle re-offending, and therefore cut crime in 
Scotland and the size of our prison population. To achieve this, we propose a number of 
practical changes 

The presumption will be that an offender given a custodial sentence of less than 6 months will 
have that sentence turned into an equivalent punishment in the community. However, if an 
offender commits a further crime while serving a community punishment they will be punished 
severely. This will involve serving their original sentence in full, plus any sentence given for 
their later offence, with no prospect of remission. 

Although there will be a presumption against short prison sentences, sheriffs must retain 
independence in sentencing. Therefore if a Sheriff felt that, in an exceptional case, a short 
sentence was appropriate, perhaps to give an offender a ‘short sharp shock’, that option would 
remain open. However, the Sheriff will require to state in open court why no alternative 
community based sentence was viewed as appropriate. 

The effect of this reform will be to drastically reduce the number of petty criminals and 
fine defaulters in our prison system, leaving prison for serious offenders and those that are 
a threat to the public. Prison workers will be free to concentrate on rehabilitating such 
offenders, and tax-payers money saved will be directed to areas that genuinely make 
communities safer. 


Justice 


Fighting crime through rehabilitation 

If fewer petty offenders are to be incarcerated, well financed alternatives to custody will be 
essential if a sheriff is to be able to hand out a suitable punishment that also gives the best 
chance of rehabilitation. 

If sheriffs had a wider selection of alternatives to custody, prison would be kept for those who 
are a danger to society, while less serious offenders are punished in the community, where 
rehabilitation is most likely. This will also require investment in social work services and 
other bodies that work to rehabilitate offenders and offer punishment in the community in a 
variety of schemes from community service to other disposals. 

We will support a range of rehabilitation schemes and in particular increase spending on drug 
rehabilitation services by 20%. 

6 months in prison costs more than 10 times as much as a community service order. 
Offenders who serve a community order instead of a custodial sentence are a third less likely 
to re-offend and four times less likely to end up in custody for a future offence. 

In government we will therefore transfer a proportion of savings from reducing our prison 
population as a result of the new focus on tough community alternatives into rehabilitation 
and criminal justice social work. Savings will be delivered on a £ for £ basis up to a total of 
£35 million to provide a valuable increase in the resources available for these vital 
community services. 

A 5% saving in prisons expenditure will deliver this £35 million increase in services and 
provide the range of support in the community that will offer additional protection and help 
direct offenders away from a life of crime. 


Manifesto 2007 


Clearing space in our court system 

We want to see Scotland’s court system working more effectively, with our sheriffs and judges 
focused on the most serious cases. 

We will give consideration to changes to the system for small claims, where decisions are, 
more often than not, based on questions of fact rather than questions of law. Options for 
reform will include piloting a fast-track tribunal system or mediation as alternatives to free 
up court time. 

International Arbitration 

As world trade continues to expand, there will be increasing demand for high quality 
arbitration services as the preferred method to resolve cross-border commercial disputes. 

Scotland, with its international reputation in finance and law is ideally placed to offer 
world-class arbitration services. With arbitration offering greater flexibility and lower cost 
than traditional legal processes, an international arbitration service in Edinburgh would be 
well placed to attract a significant share of this growing market. 

In government we will work with Scotland’s legal community to take forward plans to create a 
Scottish International Arbitration Centre. 

The Prison Estate 

We are committed to a publicly owned and run prison service. In government, we will use public 
sector resources and innovative ideas such as Not for Profit Trusts to deliver investment. 

We are committed to the long-term future of Peterhead Prison including the rebuilding of the 
prison and will seek to protect and enhance the valuable resource it provides in dealing with 
sex offenders in Scotland. 


Justice 


Promoting Equality in Scotland 

The SNP supports a written constitution for an independent Scotland to guarantee the rights 
and liberties of citizens and limit the power of government. 

Prior to independence the SNP will not promote or support legislation or policies which 
discriminate on the grounds of race, disability, age, gender, faith or religion, social background 
or sexual orientation. 

The Act of Settlement 1701 is discriminatory and has no place in a modern society. Accordingly 
we will seek agreement with the government in London on its repeal. 

In government we will pull together the different strands of equality legislation under our 
control to deliver an integrated equality strategy based on the recognition that discrimination 
harms people and communities, undermines our economic competitiveness and damages our 
international reputation. 

This will include measures to: 

• Ensure that the Disability Equality Duty and Race Equality Duty are implemented effectively 
• Assess legislation and public service reforms for impact on equality 
• Develop the One Scotland, Many Cultures campaign 
• Increase measures to ensure that disabled people are made aware of their rights and service 
providers are made aware of their responsibilities in making provision for disabled people 
• Expand hate crime legislation to protect disabled people, and people from the lesbian, gay, 
bisexual and transgendered community, as recommended by the Working Group on Hate 
Crimes set up by the Scottish Executive 

Rural Affairs 


VI. Department of Rural Affairs 
The SNP believes in a more successful future for Scotland and for our rural communities. 

Rural Scotland already makes a substantial contribution to the Scottish economy. This can and 
will grow as we develop our nation’s renewable potential and support our important farming 
and fishing sectors. 

The SNP wants a vibrant rural economy and vibrant rural communities and the Department 
will work closely with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to ensure 
the benefits of improved infrastructure, business growth and job creation are felt by all parts 
of our nation. 

Departmental Priorities 

Supporting sustainable growth in the rural economy 

The SNP in government is determined to deliver strong sustainable growth that is enjoyed by 
communities in all parts of Scotland. 

Our proposals will see a new focus on renewable generation so that the green energy 
revolution brings benefit in terms of high quality jobs and investment across rural Scotland. 
In particular, our support for offshore generation will produce particular spin offs for 
Scotland’s coastal communities. 

One area of growing importance with the SNP will be the development of bio-fuels. We will 
set out plans to promote the growing of energy crops in Scotland’s forestry industry and 
agriculture sector so that Scotland takes full advantage of this important route to reduced 
carbon emissions. 

We believe energy crops and the development of local bio-fuels generation capacity will 
provide an important boost to Scotland’s rural economy. 

More details of our plans for sustainable economic growth are contained in the Finance and 
Sustainable growth section of this manifesto. The Department of Rural Affairs will work closely 
with our minister for energy and the environment to ensure national economic policies deliver 
substantial advantages in Scotland’s rural communities. 


Rural Affairs 

Growing Scotland’s agriculture sector 

Scotland has a high quality and highly valuable reputation in its agriculture industries. 
These industries make a substantial contribution to the Scottish economy as well as providing 
jobs and other benefits for our rural communities. We will ensure that this important sector 
receives the support it deserves to energise those involved and let them maximise their profit, 
grow their businesses and achieve their full potential. Our approach will be driven by these 
central principles. 


New entrants to farming 

Our agriculture sector is renowned throughout the world for its high quality, high value 
products. We believe nations should aspire to food security and this should be a key aim. 
We must build on Scotland’s international reputation for producing quality and healthy food. 
The agricultural industry provides the economic backbone for much of rural Scotland as well 
as the lifeblood of many rural communities. However Scotland's vital farming skills are in 
danger of dying out due to a failure by the Scottish Executive to attract new blood to the 
industry. The needs of rural areas have been given too low a priority. 

It is vital that we build a viable future for the agriculture sector. The SNP will introduce a new 
entrants scheme for farmers. Our aim is to build a system that works best in a Scottish context 
and we will support this initiative with annual funding of £10 million. This may be further 
augmented by European funds. 

An SNP-led Scottish government will work with the industry to ensure that this policy provides 
continuity and new opportunities for owners, tenant farmers and crofters. We will also work 
with stakeholders to reach agreement on removing entry barriers to the industry. 

A Sustainable Future for the Tenanted Sector 

The SNP will work in partnership with the industry to support a thriving and healthy tenanted 
sector. We will reflect on the success or otherwise of recent legislation and seek opportunities 
to make land available in the tenanted sector. The SNP will encourage estate owners to make 
available starter units for new tenants. 

Empowering the Industry - A Fairer Deal for Primary Producers 

The SNP supports the introduction of an independent ombudsman to give teeth to the 
Supermarket Code of Practice. A priority for the SNP in Government will be addressing the 
imbalance in power between the big supermarkets and our primary producers at the bottom 
of the supply chain. The SNP will not allow the big multi-national supermarkets to exploit 
suppliers. 


Manifesto 2007 

We will also establish a new dialogue with the supermarkets to help develop a better working 
relationship between the various players in the supply chain. 

Building on Our International Reputation 

Scotland is famous around the world for producing premium food and drink products. 
We believe that we can do much more. The SNP is impressed by Ireland’s Bord Bia and will 
discuss with the industry establishing a similar food and drink body for Scotland to work 
in partnership with Scotland’s existing overseas promotion network. 


Making the Job Easier and Fairer 

The SNP is concerned by the failure of the recent CAP reforms to cut down the amount of red 
tape and paperwork. 

We will support a review of the enforcement of subsidy regulations. The SNP recognises that 
farmers who commit innocent errors in their paperwork are made to feel like criminals and that 
the resulting penalties imposed are often disproportionate to the offence. The SNP will raise 
the system’s lack of flexibility at European Union level. At home, we will introduce a truly 
independent appeals panel in response to the existing system’s shortcomings. SERAD officials 
should not sit in judgement on decisions made by colleagues. 

Tackling the Regulatory Burden 

The SNP recognises the concern expressed by farmers and other sectors in response to the 
constant stream of regulations and associated charges flowing from Scotland’s quangos 
especially SEPA. Indeed, official statistics indicate that in our rural areas regulation is seen 
as the biggest obstacle to the success of business. Regulations must deliver benefits and not 
just costs. 

In government we are determined to deliver lighter and effective regulation. This commitment 
will include a policy of ‘one in, one out’ so new regulations replace rather than add to old 
regulations. 

The SNP will seek ways to reduce the burden on the farming community and will pilot schemes 
so that agencies work in partnership to ensure single visits to farms, to deal with a wider 
range of regulatory issues. 

We have undertaken to review the role of enforcement agencies SEPA and SNH. The SNP is 
proposing to merge these two agencies and review the implementation of the plethora of 
regulations relating to agriculture. 

The SNP will also explore how the planning regime can be made more sympathetic to the needs 
of our farmers and other rural sectors to help promote appropriate development. 


Rural Affairs 


A stronger voice in Europe 

The SNP recognises the important role that Europe has to play in our agriculture policy. 
The Labour-Lib Dem coalition have little or no sway in Brussels and the industry's interests 
are poorly served by a UK approach that gives too little priority to Scottish farming interests. 
This situation has gone on for too long at the expense of our farmers. A voice for Scotland to 
protect our distinct interests will be essential in light of the “health check” of recent CAP 
reforms due in 2008 and the review of the LFA Scheme in 2010. We will pro-actively act to 
safeguard agriculture support for Scotland’s farmers. 

We will provide Scotland with a strong and independent voice in Europe that will speak up for 
Scotland's Agricultural interests. Scotland cannot and should not be denied a say in the EU. 
We will work to deliver a stronger role for Scottish Ministers, so a Scottish government is 
given direct input into EU decision making that has an impact on our farmers. 

In Europe and across the world, Scotland’s overseas representation and economic agencies will 
be given the task of helping to promote Scottish food more effectively. 

Supporting locally grown Scottish produce 

Consumers are beginning to think about the consequences of the supermarket-led dash for 
cheap, often imported, food and the impact of ‘food miles’ on the environment. A return to 
shopping locally at Farmers’ Markets and local shops must be encouraged. The continued 
expansion of the Farmers’ Market network is one of the huge success stories of Scottish 
agriculture in recent times and will be supported by the SNP. 

We want to see more locally grown produce used in Scotland’s public sector. It is ridiculous 
that some of Scotland’s hospitals transport ready-prepared meals hundreds of miles from 
Wales to be reheated and served to patients. This is bad for our environment and bad for local 
producers. 

In government the SNP will encourage the use of fresh, local food throughout the public sector. 
We will examine options for introducing a requirement in future public contracts for the use of 
fresh food, which will favour locally sourced and produced meals. And we will consult on 
changes to planning regulations to allow for a requirement on supermarkets that a proportion 
of goods stocked are sourced and delivered locally. 

A key element of the SNP’s strategy will be food education especially in our schools. The SNP 
will support education initiatives that teach our children where their food comes from and its 
relationship with their health, environment and the local economy. 


Manifesto 2007 


Country of Origin Labelling 

Scotland’s food producers invest in meeting the highest animal welfare and environmental 
standards that can be found anywhere yet must compete in the same market as other foreign 
producers who fail to meet such high standards and don’t incur the same expense. 

Consumers must be provided with clear and concise labelling to allow them make informed 
choices. The SNP will tackle the issues that arise from cheap and inferior imports making their 
ways to our supermarket shelves. 

The Organic Sector 

Scotland is world-renowned for our clean environment and the quality of our produce. 
In government we will work to support increased production of organic food and will ask 
Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise to come forward with specific 
proposals for improved access to equity based financial support for farm businesses looking 
to make the transition to organic production. 

Co-operatives 

The SNP will promote Farmers’ Co-operatives that are currently under-developed in Scotland in 
comparison to other countries. We believe that co-operation can empower primary producers in 
the marketplace and improve profitability. Our farmers and rural businesses can reap social 
and economic benefits through further co-operation. 

Crofting 

The SNP supports the development of crofting as a nature-friendly, small-scale agriculture 
system well fitted to provide home bases for many who live in our most fragile remote and 
island communities. 

The SNP’s priorities will include speeding up the development of forest crofts across Scotland 
and tackling transport costs for crofting areas. We will also ensure LFASS meets the continued 
needs of the least favoured areas. We pledge to act on the findings of the crofting inquiry 
chaired by Professor Shucksmith due to report later in 2007. 


Rural Affairs 

GM Crops 

The SNP will maintain a moratorium on planting GM crops in Scotland. This respects the 
consumers who demand locally-produced conventional and organic food. 

Building a better future for the fishing industry 

Scotland's fishing industry provides tens of thousands of jobs and generates hundreds of 
millions of pounds for the Scottish economy. It also provides the heart of many of our coastal 
communities who depend on the success of that industry. Fishing is vital to our national 
economic interest and should be given the support that it deserves. The UK has always given, 
and always will give, fishing a low priority status. We will give it the representation it 
deserves. 

Leading in Europe 

The failure of successive UK Conservative and Labour governments as well as the Labour-Lib 
Dem Executive to adequately represent or protect the interests of our fishing industry is one 
of the biggest failings of the current constitutional settlement. We now know that our 
fishermen were described as being "expendable" when we entered the European Union and 
that attitude has been the hallmark of successive governments' treatment of this industry. 
That failure is reflected in the disastrous Common Fisheries Policy and its impact on our 
fishing industry. 

Two recent events, the cut in days at sea at last December’s negotiations in Brussels and in 
March of this year when DEFRA decided to give away valuable prawn quota to Germany without 
consulting our own fishermen, confirm the need for a new approach. 

We will give Scotland’s fishermen better representation and a stronger voice. With about three 
quarters of the UK fishery Scotland should lead the UK's Ministerial delegation at EU meetings, 
just as Flanders does for Belgium. The current system whereby landlocked Austria and 
Luxembourg have a greater say over Scotland's fisheries than Scotland does is unsustainable. 

We propose that industry representatives will be seconded to ministerial teams participating 
in international negotiations. No longer will industry representatives be locked out of 
negotiations and ignored. 

In Government, the SNP’s First Minister will seek an early meeting with the UK Government 
to seek the lead role in EU fisheries negotiations. Likewise, we will meet with the European 
Commission to discuss the impact of the CFP on Scotland. 


Manifesto 2007 


A better future outside the CFP 

The SNP will continue to work for withdrawal from the Common Fisheries Policy and will not 
support any future European Constitution that grants the EU "exclusive competence" over this 
valuable resource. We will work with our partners to enlist support for the repatriation of 
fisheries responsibilities to member states. 

We favour national control over fisheries, which conserves stocks as well as the livelihoods 
of fishing communities. While we recognise that international cooperation is required in the 
management of fish stocks, conservation is not being achieved in the CFP. Our maritime 
neighbours Norway, Iceland and the Faeroe Islands all operate economically successful and 
environmentally sustainable fisheries outside the CFP. Scotland can emulate their success. 

Conservation that works 

Our fishermen will get a fishing conservation policy that is designed to provide long term 
sustainability to the industry and deliver a management regime for Scottish waters with direct 
input from both fishing and scientific stakeholders. 

Given their knowledge and expertise it is right that fishermen and other stakeholders should 
be given a greater say over the management of our fisheries. Such a fishing conservation 
policy will also take into account the demands of a mixed fishery. 

In particular we will argue in Europe for the decoupling of cod management from other species 
and for sustainable increases in quotas for other stocks, including the haddock quota. 

The SNP will ensure that future marine legislation including proposed Marine Bills strike a 
balance between the needs of our environment and those of sectors such as fisheries that have 
an economic stake in our waters. The interests of our fishermen must be central to any marine 
strategy. In particular, the SNP will only support the introduction of closed areas where strong 
scientific evidence is presented and following full consultation with all users including the 
fishing industry. 

The SNP in government will establish a Convention on the Future of Scotland’s Fishing 
Communities to frame a new fisheries management regime. We will create a permanent Scottish 
Fisheries Council, comprising industry representatives. It will have sub-committees for each 
sector and will also act as a ministerial advisory group. 

We will work in partnership with the industry to take forward many of the proposals and 
aspirations contained in the recently published Sea Fisheries Strategy. This will be updated as 
and when required. 

To help attract the crews and skippers of the future, the SNP will consult the industry on the 
introduction of a new entrants scheme. 


Rural Affairs 


In government we will work to secure quota allocation from decommissioned vessels for active 
vessels. Fishing entitlement will be allocated only to active fishermen and coastal communities 
with historic rights. The SNP opposes the introduction of Individual Transferable Quotas (ITQS) 
that would effectively privatise Scotland’s historic fishing rights. 

We recognise the important contribution increasing stocks within coastal waters can make to 
a viable and growing fishing industry and we will work with industry to put in place best 
practice, including support for nursery zones and if appropriate no-fish zones to support the 
recovery of coastal stocks following consultation with the industry. 

The industry onshore 

The SNP also recognises the importance of the onshore sector. A Development Plan for the Fish 
Processing sector and seafood companies will be published. This will include additional support 
for Seafood Scotland and specific marketing support for abundant supplies such as haddock, 
shellfish and pelagic species. 

The essential role of the on-shore sector including the scores of companies that congregate 
around Scotland’s harbours will be recognised and offered tailored support through Scotland’s 
current Enterprise network. 

In government we will also support training and professional development initiatives to help 
attract and retain deck hands. Similar initiatives will be made available for other sectors. 

The role and remit of existing organisations such as the Sea Fish Industry Authority will be 
reviewed. 

Aquaculture 

The SNP supports the development of fin fish and shellfish farming. We wish to see the highest 
quality of product and support the measures adopted to achieve this in the recent Aquaculture 
and Fisheries Act. 

We are aware of the large numbers of unused licences that sterilise site and tend to inhibit the 
entry of new firms, local firms and organic-based firms to the aquaculture industry. We will 
keep in close contact with the needs of the industry to maintain jobs vital to the economy of 
remote areas. 

We recognise the need to ensure that the industry benefits from smart regulation and the need 
to keep bureaucracy to a minimum. 


Manifesto 2007 


Freshwater fishing 

The SNP supports a sustainable and vibrant freshwater fisheries sector. We will work with 
anglers and local communities to create a national freshwater fisheries policy that seeks to 
protect biodiversity and our environment as well as enhancing the economic benefit for our 
rural economy that results from angling. 

We will take forward the work of the Freshwater Fisheries Forum with a view to modernising 
the sector’s management structures. We support the view that our rivers should be managed 
on a catchment area basis that includes all freshwater stocks. 


Promoted by Peter Murrell on behalf of the Scottish National Party, both at 107 McDonald Road, Edinburgh EH7 4NW. Printed by The Montgomery Litho Group, 170 - 204 Elliot Street, Glasgow G3 8EX. 


JOIN IN DONATE 


VOTE SNP 
Visit www.snp.org Give £1.50 now, text SNP to 84424 Polls open 7am-10pm Thursday 3 May 2007 



