ALLIANCE PARTY WESTMINSTER MANIFESTO 2024

Alliance
Leading Change
for Everyone

JULY 2024

KEY POLICIES
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Reforming the Assembly and Executive so no one party can hold
us all to ransom.
Delivering an improved financial settlement for Northern Ireland
that properly reflects our relative need and allows investment in
our public services and economy.
Revising fiscal rules to account for the costs of environmental
inaction and to enable investment in climate action.
Creating a Green New Deal to decarbonise our economy, protect
workers, tackle fuel poverty, and create thousands of jobs.
Repairing the UK-EU relationship, including negotiating a
comprehensive Veterinary Agreement and better promoting dual
market access under the Windsor Framework.
Securing dedicated funding for integration, early years, and early
intervention projects as a successor to Fresh Start.
Supporting families with childcare costs by demanding more
generous tax relief and the creation of a new childcare strategy
for Northern Ireland.
Advocating for a fair, welcoming, and effective immigration system
that upholds human rights and meets the needs of our economy.
Reforming UK democracy by scrapping the Tories’ anti-protest laws,
First Past the Post and introducing votes at 16.
Championing human rights and the rule of law domestically
and internationally.

Alliance, it adds up
for Everyone

LEADER’S FOREWORD

2

DEPUTY LEADER’S FOREWORD

3

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

4

CHAPTER 1:

LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND

7
8
10
10
11

CHAPTER 2:

UK PUBLIC FINANCES

12
13
13
14
16
16

CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY

18
19
20

CHAPTER 4: GREEN NEW DEAL

22
23
24

CHAPTER 5: MIGRATION

26
27
28
29

CHAPTER 6: UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY

30
31
31
32
32

INSTITUTIONAL REFORM
NORTH-SOUTH AND EAST-WEST COOPERATION
SHARED FUTURE
DEALING WITH THE PAST

IMPACT ON PUBLIC SERVICES, ECONOMY AND CLIMATE
FISCAL RULES REFORM
TAXATION, PENSIONS AND WELFARE SUPPORT
CHILDCARE
NORTHERN IRELAND PUBLIC FINANCES
CHANGING UK ECONOMIC POLICY
SUPPORTING NORTHERN IRELAND’S ECONOMY
TACKLING THE ENERGY CRISIS
KEY GREEN NEW DEAL COMMITMENTS
REFORMING THE VISA SYSTEM
OVERHAULING THE ASYLUM SYSTEM
PROTECTING THE COMMON TRAVEL AREA
HUMAN RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES
DEMOCRACY AT WESTMINSTER
EQUALITY AND SOCIAL JUSTICE
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENTS AND ONLINE SAFETY

CHAPTER 7:

OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION
OUR POSITION ON BREXIT
IMPLEMENTING THE WINDSOR FRAMEWORK
FIXING THE UK-EU RELATIONSHIP

CHAPTER 8: INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
SUPPORT FOR THE ARMED FORCES
DEFENCE SPENDING AND CO-OPERATION
GLOBAL JUSTICE AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
DEALING WITH PANDEMICS
SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND POLITICAL FREEDOMS

CONTENTS

33
34
35
36
37
38
40
40
41
42
43

PAGE 1

LEADER’S FOREWORD

We stand ready to expand our team in
Westminster, returning Stephen Farry
alongside more Alliance MPs. Building on our
successes in the 2022 Assembly election and
local government elections last year, we know
that people want strong Alliance
representation at all levels of government.
Alliance is already leading change on better
health outcomes, making our communities
safer, expanding inclusive education and
delivering affordable childcare. We are
working to combat climate change, promote a
cleaner, greener environment and to create a
vibrant and dynamic economy.
In this Westminster manifesto, we have set out
our policy priorities for the next five-year
term. We have focused specifically on those
matters over which Westminster has direct
control or influence. This isn’t a stand-alone
document – to get the fullest picture of how
Alliance plans to deliver better; it should be
read in conjunction with our Local
Government and Assembly manifestos and
our policy documents on Childcare,
Institutional Reform and our Green New Deal.
Crucially, we can use increased influence at
Westminster to unlock a fairer financial deal
for Northern Ireland and advance reform of
the Assembly and Executive so no one party
can collapse things ever again. Fairer funding
and stable institutions add up to more
sustainable politics and public services – a
brighter future for everyone.

This election is a chance not only to remove a
negative, destructive Conservative
government but also to hold to account those
local politicians who propped up, supported
and backed some of their most divisive,
regressive policies.
We have a chance for change.
But to make that change happen, you have to
help us deliver it.
On Thursday the 4th of July, you have the
opportunity to make a positive change to your
life and the lives of everyone in Northern
Ireland. To positively influence the issues that
matter to you most. To support a united
community and reduce division in our society.
To ensure you have positive representation at
Westminster, committed to a more prosperous
and fair society for everyone.
Together, we can lead that change. Your
support plus our commitment to delivery
equals a brighter, more optimistic future for
everyone.
If that’s the sort of leadership you want, play
your part.
On July 4th, Vote Alliance.

Naomi Long
Leader of the Alliance Party

Alliance is growing as more people recognise
that a divided society means less for
everyone. The cost of division means
hundreds of millions of pounds less to invest
each year in what really matters to you.
PAGE 2

LEADER’S FOREWORD

DEPUTY LEADER’S FOREWORD

It has been my greatest privilege to represent
North Down in Westminster over the past four
years. My dedication to serving the people of
North Down has been unwavering and I am
proud of my track record: delivering on behalf
of my constituents and making their voices
heard.
My small team and I have consistently
punched well above our weight and achieved
a great deal in this Parliament. I have used my
platform to tackle crucial issues facing
Northern Ireland and beyond, in line with the
Alliance Party’s vision of a shared and
integrated society, ensuring fairness,
inclusivity, and prosperity for all.
I led the charge in securing the £3.3 billion
financial package for Northern Ireland,
providing much-needed relief to support our
public services and economy while continuing
to advocate for sustainable, long-term
solutions.
I have championed calls for the UK
Government’s fiscal rules to adopt a more
long-term approach to investment, recognise
the indirect costs of environmental inaction,
and unlock essential funding for public
services.
The Alliance Party has pioneered the concept
of a Green New Deal for Northern Ireland,
aiming to create new green jobs, promote
social justice, and save our planet.

I have been steadfast in defending Northern
Ireland from a hard Brexit. I consistently
opposed destructive unilateral actions from
the Conservatives and the DUP, which would
have severely damaged our economy. Instead,
I have worked to provide practical solutions to
a range of problems, and build a closer
relationship between the UK and EU will
remain a major priority in the forthcoming
Parliament.
As the leading advocate for reforming
Northern Ireland’s political institutions in
Westminster, I have worked tirelessly to
ensure that we never again face a situation
where they collapse, leaving a political
vacuum and long-term damage to our
economy and public services. I have
consistently stood up for all our rights, civil
liberties, and the rule of law, pushing back
against divisive and toxic Tory rhetoric, and
opposing regressive legislation.
The Alliance Party recognises that trust in
politics is crucial for an effective democratic
society. I am determined to help restore that
trust by promoting transparency,
accountability, and integrity in public life.
I hope to be returned to Parliament with
colleagues so that we can build on this
success, using our influence at Westminster to
make Northern Ireland a better place for
everyone.

Stephen Farry
Deputy Leader of the Alliance Party

DEPUTY LEADER’S FOREWORD

PAGE 3

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1 LEADING CHANGE
FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
Northern Ireland has transformed in many
ways since the signing of the Good Friday
Agreement in 1998. But while our society, our
economy and even our politics have evolved,
our institutions have not, and they are now
holding back progress.
We believe:
• Northern Ireland deserves better than
stop-start politics. Our institutions should
be reformed to prevent any one party from
holding them hostage ever again.
• In a society for everyone, underpinned by
our shared values of equality, respect for
diversity and interdependence. Funding
should be released for key projects such as
integrated schools and early years
investment that will help us build a shared
future.
• That justice should have no time limit, and
we support those seeking truth, justice and
acknowledgement for the events of the
past. The Legacy Act should be replaced
with an alternative that has the support of
victims and local parties.

2 UK PUBLIC FINANCES
Public services have been squeezed beyond
recognition and the UK’s public finances are in
a very bad place. Without reform, current UK
fiscal policy is inhibiting investment,
reinforcing climate inaction and storing up
environmental, social and financial crises for
the future.

PAGE 4

We want to see:
• Changes to the Fiscal Rules, so the impact
of public spending decisions on the UK’s
overall asset base (or wealth) is reflected,
rather than just its impact on debt. This
would better capture and reflect the costs
associated with climate inaction, unlock
vital investment in struggling public
services, incentivise investment in our
infrastructure and skills, as well as provide
resilience to external shocks and risks such
as climate change.
• A progressive taxation system, where the
super-wealthy pay their fair share, and the
phased implementation of carbon taxes to
raise more money for public services, and
to progress the transition to net zero.
• A radical rethink of the social security
system. Food bank use is rising and people
are often unable to survive on the
inadequate income benefits provide.
• A major investment in childcare, both
through a bespoke model in Northern
Ireland and through tax relief at
Westminster.

3 NORTHERN IRELAND
PUBLIC FINANCES
Northern Ireland is not adequately funded to
reflect relative need, and so our capacity to
sustain and transform public services is
hindered. To sustain and transform our
education, health and justice systems, to
invest in public sector pay, drive the local
economy and protect our environment, we
need fair funding.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

To achieve this, Alliance will:
• Work to secure a base-lined fiscal floor, set
above 124, at the next spending review. We
do not believe the UK Government’s figure
of 124 captures our relative need and
believe this will be borne out by
independent analysis that the Treasury
should commission.
• Continue to press for long-term
transformation and public spending on an
‘invest to save’ basis. There is much more
we can do with the money we have to
ensure quality public services for people in
NI.
• Tackle the cost of division. Research from
2016 cited the costs of division in NI ranged
between £400-800m. We want the UK
Government to fund new research into the
updated costs, so that we can tackle it and
funnel savings back into public services.

4 ECONOMY
We believe Northern Ireland can become
Europe's most innovative and dynamic
regional economy. We have many strengths,
including unique dual market access. Whilst
many economic levers lie in the hands of the
NI Executive, Westminster can and should do
more to enable NI’s growth.
We want to see:
• The promotion of dual market access for
Northern Ireland. The Windsor Framework
provides NI with a relative opportunity
compared to the rest of the UK in relation
to unfettered access for goods. This
opportunity should be exploited to the
benefit of businesses and people in NI.
• The Apprenticeship Levy reviewed, with
any levy raised from Northern Ireland ringfenced for re-investment in skills.
• Renewed partnerships between
Government and local businesses in NI on a
North-South and East-West basis.
• Support for regional industries by boosting
research, innovation, skills, infrastructure
and access to finance across the entire UK.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

• A legal duty placed on the UK Government
to ensure its economic policies are
assessed on their likelihood of reducing
regional inequality in the economy and that
levelling up is accelerated.
• A fundamental review of the Levelling Up
and Shared Prosperity Funds, so that they
support local priorities in NI and are
controlled by the NI Executive.

5 GREEN NEW DEAL
We believe tackling the climate emergency
goes hand in hand with economic
transformation and social justice. In 2021, we
published the Alliance Green New Deal that
sets out our plan for a fair, green economy.
Since then, energy prices and the cost of
living have reached a crisis point due to the
Conservative Government's reckless inaction
and u-turns on critical climate pledges.
We will continue to make the case for a Green
New Deal. We believe:
• Energy security is more important than
ever. We must invest in renewable energy
to guard against price precarity and to
boost the industry in Northern Ireland.
• We need a UK-wide emergency retrofitting
programme to reduce emissions and tackle
fuel poverty.
• A just transition to net zero, part funded
through tax increases on fossil fuel giants
and wealth, property taxes on the superrich and via long-term green bond
issuance, ISAs and pension funds.
• The use of fossil fuels should end, with a
ban on fracking and the opening of new
coal mines and pits.

6 MIGRATION
Alliance believes in a united community. That
means representing everyone in Northern
Ireland, celebrating the diversity of our
communities and upholding the rights and
dignity of us all.
We reject the current rhetoric around
migrants and asylum seekers, and we support
a fair and compassionate immigration system
for the UK that recognises the invaluable role
migrants play in our economy.

PAGE 5

We want to see:
• An overhaul of the visa system to make it
more affordable and the removal of cruel
minimum threshold salary requirements for
family visas.
• The scrapping of the shortage occupation
list and points-based system, replacing it
with a visa system based on the real needs
of Northern Ireland’s economy and society.
• The creation of safe routes for asylum
seekers to reduce exploitation and
trafficking, and so that no one is forced to
make treacherous journeys to the UK.

8 OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH
THE EUROPEAN UNION
We believe Brexit was and continues to be
fundamentally destructive for the UK as a
whole. For Northern Ireland, it poses huge
challenges for our economy, environment,
society and wider political stability.
We support the special arrangements
provided for under the Windsor Framework
but we want to improve its implementation to
help people and businesses in NI.
We want:

• The Rwanda Scheme abolished, and
asylum claims processed quickly in a
trauma-informed way.

• A negotiated Veterinary Medicines
Agreement and a grace period for the next
phase of goods labelling in the interim.

• The right to work for asylum seekers in any
job after three months so they can support
themselves and their families and become
active members of their communities.

• Improved information and assistance to
businesses based in Great Britain regarding
trading in NI.

7 UK POLITICAL REFORM,
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY
Just as Alliance stands for openness, honestly
and fairness in Stormont, we will continue to
seek to enshrine these values in Westminster.
We believe human rights, equality and the rule
of law are cornerstones of safety and stability,
and must be defended more robustly than
ever after the last Government.

• Early and enhanced engagement between
Northern Ireland’s elected representatives,
Executive departments and other
stakeholders in the development of EU law.

9 INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
AND DEFENCE

Alliance MPs will demand:

International cooperation is essential in
addressing shared global challenges. Alliance
is guided by our liberal internationalist values
and our commitment to the rules-based
international order.

• A fairer electoral system for the House of
Commons, and a directly-elected House of
Lords.

The world is an uncertain place, faced with
many challenges. With these principles in
mind, Alliance will:

• Votes at 16 for all elections and
referendums.

• Work towards a two-state solution in the
Middle East, based on international law.
This includes the recognition of Palestine as
a sovereign state and an end to the illegal
occupation of Gaza and the persecution of
Palestinians in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories.

• A trans-inclusive ban on so-called
Conversion Therapy that extends to NI.
• Better regulation of AI and social media,
including a watchdog for child safety
online.

• Continue in our support for Ukraine’s fight
for freedom against Russian aggression
and for the ongoing provision of aid to
Ukraine.
• Push to reinstate the Department for
International Development and for
spending on Official Development
Assistance of 0.7% of the UK’s gross
national income.

PAGE 6

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

INSTITUTIONAL REFORM
NORTH-SOUTH AND EAST-WEST COOPERATION
SHARED FUTURE
DEALING WITH THE PAST

8
10
10
11

CHAPTER 1
LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND

LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND

PAGE 7

Northern Ireland has transformed in many
ways since the Good Friday Agreement. Our
politics, economy, and society have all
evolved, and we’ve witnessed significant
demographic change.
Yet Northern Ireland has not been able to
reach its full potential, held back by the
failings of and within our political institutions.
Political division has led to poor outcomes on
some issues, and complete deadlock on
others. Our system of government has
increasingly become marred by a lack of
openness and accountability and is often
characterised by populism and cronyism.
Particular concerns include:
• Institutional sectarianism, in particular, the
designation and related voting system in
the Assembly.
• The politics of ‘them’ versus ‘us’ over
control of territory and resources rather
than any consideration of a shared vision
and common goals for Northern Ireland.
• Mutual vetoes granted to the largest
parties in the Executive, which are
undemocratic and destablising.
• Lack of incentivisation of co-operation,
moderation and accommodation, with
hardline and exclusionary politics rewarded.
• Departmental silos, with insufficient
joining-up across government and a lack of
collaboration on cross-cutting issues.
Every government needs to work on the basis
of trust, respect, and partnership. There also
needs to be a shared understanding of the
common good, a commitment to cohesion,
and adherence to collective responsibility.
However, the nature and design of the
institutions and mechanisms of government
currently magnify disagreement and
disincentivise cooperation and progress.
Alliance is committed to stable and
sustainable power-sharing that respects
liberal, democratic principles and which
supports a shared future.

PAGE 8

1.1 INSTITUTIONAL REFORM
Northern Ireland deserves a working
Assembly and Executive. Institutions that
function in between periods of stop-start
government are not good enough.
In 1998, the Good Friday Agreement provided
us with a mechanism to manage divisions. Its
success is demonstrated powerfully in the
growing number of people who now reject the
binary, divisive “two communities” model and
instead embrace the concept of a pluralist,
shared community, rich with diversity. This
transition, evident in surveys and census data
for some time, is now impacting the political
sphere with a record number of MLAs elected
in the most recent Assembly election who are
not defined as either unionist or nationalist.
Despite that change, the architecture of the
GFA continues to afford additional rights and
privileges to those who remain wedded to
binary politics at the expense of stability and
progress and to the detriment of other
minorities.
The continuing cycle of restoration and
collapse proves that the institutions are
fundamentally unstable. This impacts their
effectiveness and, in turn, the extent to which
they can serve the people of Northern Ireland.
Alliance remains committed to the principles
and spirit of the Good Friday Agreement, but
believe its structures were meant to evolve.
Notwithstanding the recent restoration of the
Assembly and the Executive, reform remains
essential for cohesion, fairness, and stability in
Northern Ireland. The lessons from recent
history reinforce this.
We will defend the Good Friday Agreement
against the potential threats posed by the UK
leaving the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR) and through the pursuit of
further divergence from the EU.
Reform must not be left to the Northern
Ireland political parties alone. Rather, the UK
and Irish governments must lead and drive
reform through their roles as co-guarantors of
the Good Friday Agreement.

LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND

We believe both immediate and medium-term
reforms are necessary. We see the immediate
changes required as falling under three broad
strands:
1

To facilitate Executive formation, the
process of nominating First and deputy
First Ministers must be amended. If the
largest party eligible to nominate the First
or deputy First Minister is unwilling to do
so, the entitlement should pass to the next
largest party, creating the ability for those
willing to nominate to do so.

2 To facilitate a functional Assembly, a
weighted majority should replace parallel
consent in “cross-community” votes. This
should be a majority of approximately twothirds of the whole Assembly, with the
precise figure to be determined after each
election to ensure it includes unionists,
nationalists and others. Without this, the
Executive may not be able to pass a
budget and the Assembly may be unable
to elect a Speaker. Further, the petition of
concern mechanism should be reformed,
restricting its use to the small number of
issues it for which it was originally
intended. Once triggered successfully,
votes should proceed by weighted
majority.

In the medium-term, we recommend the
following measures:
1

The titles of both ‘First Minister’ and
‘deputy First Minister’ are changed to ‘Joint
First Minister’, acknowledging their offices
are co-equal.

2 The positions of ‘Joint First Ministers’ be
counted against D’Hondt calculations.
3 The system of designations be abolished.
4 Arrangements for an Executive to be
formed through a voluntary coalition
should be put in place.
Full details of our proposals for institutional
reform can be found in our paper, Sharing
Power to Build a Shared Future.

3 To facilitate a functional Assembly, the
threshold for triggering a “crosscommunity” vote within the Executive
should also be raised to reflect the reforms
proposed to the petition of concern in the
Assembly, used only on key issues; in
addition, the “three meeting convention”
for adding items to the Agenda should be
placed on a statutory footing.

LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND

PAGE 9

1.2 NORTH-SOUTH AND
EAST-WEST COOPERATION
Strands Two and Three of the Good Friday
Agreement mandate cooperation between
Executive Ministers and their counterparts in
the Republic of Ireland and across the UK.
Whilst this cooperation is welcome, we believe
it should be greatly enhanced.
Northern Ireland is entirely interconnected
with Ireland and the UK. Yet, the Strand Two
and Three institutions receive much less
attention than those of Strand One, and their
scope lacks the breadth and depth that is
required for meaningful cooperation.

North-South
The Strand Two institutions have served as an
early warning system ahead of political
collapse, with withdrawal from or the
frustration of the North-South Ministerial
Council (NSMC) often indicating the
beginnings of a political crisis that will
ultimately affect Strand One institutions.
We believe there is significant scope for
enhanced practical cooperation around
economic, social and environmental areas, and
these opportunities for cooperation are
underserved by the NSMC. The NSMC needs
more dynamic engagement and a substantive
work programme, including on the integrated
single energy market and on areas that have
changed due to Brexit. For example, the
Windsor Framework covers only the
movement of goods into the Single Market
but doesn’t cover freedoms for services,
capital and the free movement of people.
These are areas in which the NSMC could
meaningfully drive cooperation and
collaboration.
There is currently an effective veto on NSMC
meetings, whereby a Unionist or Nationalist
Minister failing to agree to attend affects its
‘balance’ and can, therefore, prevent the
meeting from taking place. This arrangement
highlights the pervasive nature of vetoes
within our political institutions and should be
removed.

PAGE 10

East-West
Whilst its origins lie in the desire for a new
devolved administration in Northern Ireland to
build relationships with both governments, the
British Irish Council should now have a much
wider role in enhancing and managing BritishIrish relations and providing a forum for
governments across these islands. This
potential has not yet been realised, and postEU Exit, it is more important than ever.
There are opportunities to further develop
cooperation in areas such as energy, the
environment, public health, education, trade,
and transport.
The British-Irish Intergovernmental
Conference has not met consistently, which
has impacted on its success in developing
cooperation between the UK and Irish
governments.
Alliance believe that free movement and
reciprocal rights under the Common Travel
Area should be preserved and enhanced. This
is explored in further detail in the section on
Migration.

1.3 SHARED FUTURE
The Alliance Party vision is of a shared future
where everyone is safe, can make a positive
contribution and is treated fairly and with
respect. We believe in a society for everyone,
underpinned by our shared values of equality,
respect for diversity and interdependence.
We reject the notion of “two communities”
and instead believe a shared future will enable
us to build a stronger Northern Ireland,
making it a more attractive place to live, learn,
work, and invest. This will also allow us to save
resources by investing in services for everyone
and ensure better public services for all.
We believe the UK Government should help
build a shared future in Northern Ireland by:
• Funding research to fully cost economic,
social and financial divisions in Northern
Ireland. The Executive should use this to
inform their work, factoring the cost of
division into departmental decisionmaking, including capital investment, and
agreeing an action plan to dismantle it.

LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND

• Creating a successor fund to the Fresh
Start capital fund for shared and integrated
education. This should encompass the
remaining integrated school projects that
lost out on Fresh Start funding and should
also expand to include investment in early
years and early intervention. This fund
would be transformative in its scope and
should be collaborative in nature and
focused on shared outcomes through
trauma-informed projects. As with Fresh
Start, this would be additional to other
funding streams such as PeacePlus and
from philanthropic funding.
• UK Government departments operating in
Northern Ireland should uphold their
equality duties as outlined in section 75 of
the Northern Ireland Act 1998. This should
also extend to capital spending decisions.

1.4 DEALING WITH THE PAST
Legacy Act
Alliance has long campaigned for truth, justice
and support services for victims and survivors
of the Troubles. We have long held that the
following principles should guide all proposals
to deal with the legacy of the conflict:
• Promoting reconciliation.
• Upholding the rule of law.
• Acknowledging and addressing the
suffering of victims and survivors.
• Facilitating the pursuit of justice and
information recovery.
• Complying with human rights.
• Proportionality, fairness, transparency and
equity.
We believed that the proposals contained
within the Stormont House Agreement
adhered to these principles and provided a
sound path to progress for those seeking
truth, justice and acknowledgement.

The new Legacy Act was driven by internal
Conservative politics and perceptions of what
veterans wanted, rather than the best interests
of victims and survivors and Northern Ireland
society. It represents a betrayal of previous
political agreements and is at odds with the
rule of law, justice, and reconciliation.
It has no legitimacy, having been foisted on
the people of Northern Ireland without their
support. It defies the views of stakeholders,
including political parties, human rights
experts, and victims’ groups.
Justice should have no time limit, and the
criminal justice system should always be
available to those who seek to use it. The
ruling of the High Court in Northern Ireland
around the central immunity clause is
welcome, and we await the outcome of the
Irish Government’s interstate case.
We will advocate for the replacement of the
Legacy Act with an alternative co-designed
with local political parties and victim and
survivors’ groups.

Victims and Survivors
We have long supported the introduction of a
pension for victims and survivors of the
Troubles, and Justice Minister Naomi Long
MLA took the lead in implementing the
Troubles Permanent Disablement Pension
Scheme when other executive ministers
refused.
The August 2024 deadline for backdated
applications should be extended to allow
victims and survivors the time to access
support in completing their applications and
to allow the Victims’ Payment Scheme to
manage the flow of applications.
We support the campaign for a payment for
those bereaved during the Troubles, and we
welcome the scoping work being undertaken
to establish the best way forward.

Unfortunately, after years of delay, the UK
Government recommitted itself to the
Stormont House Agreement proposals in
January 2020, only to abandon them within
weeks.

LEADING CHANGE FOR NORTHERN IRELAND

PAGE 11

IMPACT ON PUBLIC SERVICES, ECONOMY AND CLIMATE
FISCAL RULES REFORM
TAXATION, PENSIONS AND WELFARE SUPPORT
CHILDCARE
NORTHERN IRELAND PUBLIC FINANCES

13
13
14
16
16

CHAPTER 2
UK PUBLIC FINANCES

PAGE 12

UK PUBLIC FINANCES

UK public finances are in a difficult space –
Public Sector Net Debt is at a level last seen in
the early 1960s. This is after over a decade of
damaging austerity initiated by the UK
Government to address the post-2008
financial bailout and associated debt
overhang. Covid-related expenditure has since
contributed to debt levels, and there is no
obvious way out of this precarious financial
position under current Treasury rules.
The Truss/Kwarteng Mini Budget
compounded the situation by undermining
trust and credibility in the UK Government
and causing underlying interest rates to spike;
they remain elevated as a result. This has had
the dual effect of increasing borrowing costs
for the UK Government and homeowners and
businesses – many households are still to feel
these impacts when they reach the end of
fixed-rate mortgage deals.

The UK is also facing significant environmental
risks. There are enormous costs associated
with climate inaction. Recent research
suggests that this will cost the global
economy £30 trillion per year by 2049. Huge
economic and social impacts are currently
accruing and are not actively factored into
political decision-making.
Significant investment is required to offset this
decline in public services and to mitigate
economic and environmental risks. Alliance
believes that there is a potential solution to
the public funding/debt deadlock and that it
lies in fundamental reform of elements of the
UK’s fiscal framework – specifically, Fiscal
Rules.

2.2 FISCAL RULES REFORM

Realistically, future economic and financial
shocks are highly probable, particularly given
rising global geopolitical tensions. Public
sector debt levels will continue to face
pressure from emerging crises, and the UK
Government must unravel the conflict that this
creates in terms of financing essential public
services and investing in the future.

We know that fiscal discipline is vital in
protecting the UK’s credit rating and the
associated costs of servicing public sector
debt. Fiscal Rules – essentially the spending
discipline that the Government observes to
ensure that expenditure is responsible,
sustainable, and not unduly subjected to
political short-termism – are extremely
important in ensuring financial stability.

2.1 IMPACT ON PUBLIC SERVICES,
ECONOMY AND CLIMATE

However, there is an emerging argument that
these Fiscal Rules are too restrictive and, as
such, are constraining investment, economic
growth and environmental protection.

In this fiscal climate, our public services have
been squeezed beyond recognition. Health
waiting lists are rising, school budgets are
inadequate to meet needs, and there is
insufficient funding for key areas of public
concern, such as the economy, policing and
justice, and environmental protection. Without
reform, public services will continue to decline
and decay at the expense of societal wellbeing, and our economic and environmental
future.
The UK economy continues to underperform.
Brexit has caused further challenges, and the
additional resultant trade barriers to the UK’s
largest market have hindered growth
significantly.

UK PUBLIC FINANCES

Alliance believes that this argument is
particularly pertinent in relation to
expenditure on the environment. The UK’s
current fiscal framework does not adequately
reflect future costs associated with
environmental inaction, which, as quantified
above, runs into trillions of pounds annually.
The disconnect between political shorttermism and the inherently future-orientated
impact of environmental spending needs to
be better identified and mitigated in public
spending decisions.
Alliance believes reforming the Fiscal Rules
could unlock significant investment, including
for a Green New Deal – see Chapter 4 for
more information. This could be funded via
long-term bond issuance in addition to
existing UK Green Gilts. Without such reform,
UK fiscal policy is reinforcing relative climate
inaction and storing up environmental, social
and financial crises for the future.

PAGE 13

On this basis, Alliance believes there is scope
to unlock additional expenditure at a UK
Government level, including for NI. This can be
done in a fiscally prudent manner to prevent
unintended consequences regarding financial
market reactions and underlying interest rates.
This would necessitate strategic targeting of
associated expenditure in areas that will
mitigate the – as yet not fully captured – costs
of environmental inaction and would add to
the future value of the UK’s natural
environment, economy and wider
infrastructure.
We believe that UK Fiscal Rules should
recognise the impact of spending on UK
Government’s overall asset base in terms of
broader economic infrastructure, natural
resources and the quality of our environment
– not merely the impact on debt and deficit,
as is currently the case. If public sector
spending creates additional net wealth, albeit
on the basis of interim debt incurrence, then it
could and should be deemed fiscally prudent.
Significant climate and environmental
expenditure would also provide enhanced
cover for households and businesses in terms
of ongoing geopolitical risks and shocks, and
the threat that this presents in terms of
energy price fluctuations, and the impact on
the cost of living/doing business. A greener
and more energy-efficient infrastructure
would reduce exposure to oil and gas price
shocks and be a sound investment for
households and businesses alike.

2.3 TAXATION, PENSIONS
AND WELFARE SUPPORT
As set out above, Alliance believes there is a
credible case for increasing the total quantum
of funding available to the UK Government for
strategic expenditure via a revised fiscal
framework. Two other core components of the
net funding envelope, namely taxation and
welfare support, are determined by UK
Government Fiscal Policy, and have huge
implications on household wellbeing in
Northern Ireland.

Taxation
Alliance maintains that there is potential for a
fairer, more redistributive system without any
additional tax being levied on ordinary
working households. We believe the current
UK taxation policy fails to adequately capture
and reflect wealth and should be revised to
ensure a more progressive tax system.
Loopholes in the tax system accommodate
significant tax avoidance for the superwealthy.
Increasing tax on the super-wealthy would
allow for increased personal income tax
allowances, providing much-needed relief for
hard-working individuals/households – many
of whom have been subjected to fiscal drag
over recent years due to inflation-linked pay
increases, which, in fact, leave them worse off
in net income terms.

We believe this investment is also key to
addressing many of the deficiencies in the
overall UK and NI economies at present.
Strategic, targeted investment could unlock
new skills, jobs and technologies. This would
also address stalled investment levels in the
UK – which are constraining growth –
providing a stable policy outlook and
unlocking additional private sector
investment.

We believe there is scope for a shift in
taxation related to environmental protection,
including carbon taxes. Evidence suggests
that sectors in which environmental taxes
have been becoming more onerous – industry,
power generation and waste – have been
successful in reducing emissions, whereas
sectors with more stable taxation, such as
aviation and transport, have made much less
progress.

Alliance will continue to advocate for reform
of the Fiscal Framework on a strategic and
fiscally prudent basis, to benefit public
services, the economy and the environment.
We firmly believe this would unlock muchneeded funding for NI and enable us to invest
in public services and our future prosperity.

We would therefore support enhanced
taxation in these areas, provided it is phased
and proportionate, implemented in a manner
that is progressive for consumers and
minimises any unintended disruption to
business activity and investment intentions. It
is also our preference that, where
environmental taxes are levied, there is a clear
linkage with investment in environmental
improvement and tackling climate change.

PAGE 14

UK PUBLIC FINANCES

We would also like to see a tax on share
buybacks, as has recently been implemented
in the US, to incentivise productive business
investment, support the transition to net zero
and raise much-needed public funds for
investment in public services. These buybacks
occur when huge corporations use their
profits to inflate their own share price –
usually this involves oil and gas giants and big
banks; the same corporations who are
profiting the most from the cost-of-living
crisis. It is estimated that a tax on share
buybacks would raise around £1.4bn per year.

Pensions
Alliance is committed to protecting UK State
Pensions, including keeping the Triple Lock.
The current levels of state pension provisions
in the UK are relatively low by European
standards.
Alliance believes auto-enrolment in workplace
pensions is a key tool in ensuring people have
a dignified retirement. We are committed to
implementing a range of improvements in the
auto-enrolment system, including lowering the
age for automatic enrolment from 22 to 18,
action to prevent the exclusion of low earners
from auto-enrolment as a result of the current
earnings trigger, and exploring options to
default self-employed people into pension
savings.
To address the maladministration suffered by
women born in the 1950s and affected by
changes to the State Pension age, we support
a compensation system that – in line with the
WASPI campaign – is adjusted to reflect the
extent of the change in the individual’s State
Pension age and how much notice they
received.

Welfare Support
The UK continues to face a very significant
cost of living crisis, with many households –
including both those with and without people
in employment – struggling to meet the basic
standard of living. The use of food banks
continues to increase every year and
pressures on households with children are
particularly acute.
Alliance will work to end to the callous
approach to welfare reform, which has
severely harmed low-income households. We
support ending the Benefits Cap, Bedroom
Tax and two-child limit on Child Benefit on a
UK-wide basis. We also believe in a more
empathetic approach to medical assessments;
cessation of regular re-assessments for those
with progressive or incurable conditions; the
abolition of punitive sanctions and a renewed
focus on skills development and training for
those within the welfare system.
A wealth of evidence has demonstrated the
link between the two-child limit in Universal
Credit and higher poverty rates among larger
families, with a harsh impact on children.
Scrapping the policy would be one of the
most efficient ways of reducing child poverty
across the UK.
The five-week wait for initial Universal Credit
payments is also leaving many claimants
struggling to afford basic living costs and
locked into a cycle of debt from the beginning
of their UC journey. A wider review is needed
to look at ways of making the Universal Credit
system more flexible and responsive for new
claimants. We also support the establishment
of an Essentials Guarantee in the social
security system, ensuring that people’s
incomes cover the cost of living.
Carer’s Allowance remains one of the lowest
benefits of its kind in the entire welfare
system. To better recognise the enormous
contribution unpaid carers make to public
services, Alliance supports the delivery of a
Carer’s Allowance Supplement and extension
of the Carer’s Allowance earnings threshold.
We also support increases in support for
maternity, paternity, shared-parental and
adoption entitlements.

UK PUBLIC FINANCES

PAGE 15

2.4 CHILDCARE
Families and households in Northern Ireland
are currently suffering from a super-disparity
in childcare support relative to those in other
regions of the UK. Not only is this inequitable,
but Alliance considers childcare to be key
infrastructure that would allow us to unlock
current and future economic potential, and we
would urgently prioritise investment in
childcare provision.
We have proposed a bespoke model for
Northern Ireland – an Affordable Childcare
Scheme – that will deliver better outcomes for
children, reduced costs for parents, and
enhance the sustainability of childcare
provision.
We note the Northern Ireland Education
Minister’s announcement that he aims to
develop an interim scheme later in the year.
This is welcome, and we recognise much of
our own proposals in what the Minister has set
out. However, Westminster also has a role to
play.
We are calling for:
• Improvements to the UK Government’s
Tax-Free Childcare scheme such as a more
user-friendly interface; increasing/removing
the cap, and increasing the relief from 20%
to 35%.
• Better information for parents on the types
of childcare available, support with costs
and the potential risks of using
unregistered providers.
You find can out more about our childcare
policy and see our more comprehensive range
of recommendations in Children First:
Alliance’s Proposals for Child-centred and
Affordable Childcare, published in October
2023.

PAGE 16

2.5 NORTHERN IRELAND
PUBLIC FINANCES
The level of public finances available to NI
underpins the Executive and Assembly’s
capacity to sustain and transform public
services such as health, education and justice,
invest in public sector pay, drive the local
economy, and protect our environment.

Public Finances
Alliance played a pivotal role in negotiating
and securing the £3.3bn financial package in
December 2023. During the period of
collapse, we made numerous representations
to the UK Government to flag the false
economies associated with the neglect of
public services and pay levels in Northern
Ireland. We advocated for a financial package
to stabilise and transform public finances and
public services.
Restoring our financial health will require
stabilisation of the current financial crisis, and
subsequent transformation of public spending
to place public finances and services on a
more sustainable footing. Northern Ireland
cannot achieve better outcomes through
continued cuts. Longer-term solutions are
needed.
Whilst welcome, the financial package that
ultimately materialised from the UK
Government fell far short of what was
required and entirely failed to account for the
funding gap in previous years. Northern
Ireland’s public finances are in a perilous state,
and essential public sector pay awards have
largely subsumed any additional money for
this financial year contained in the Treasury
package.

UK PUBLIC FINANCES

Fundamentally, the core level of funding for NI
is key for our economic, social and financial
wellbeing. There is a credible basis to question
whether Northern Ireland is adequately
funded by the UK Government based on
relative need. The Fiscal Council suggests that
we have been structurally underfunded by
between £300–£400m per year since 2022
versus the level we would receive if an
appropriate Fiscal Floor were in place. This is
based on an assessment of relative need of
124% in NI, i.e. for every £100 spent in
England, £124 must be spent in NI to ensure
equivalent funding based on relative
underlying needs.
Alliance believes that a Fiscal Floor of 124
does not reflect our relative need in NI versus
England. The current assessment of 124% is
based on spending on policing and justice in
the period from 2017-2022 (which has been
used as a measure of related ‘need’). However,
this period was characterised by continuing
cuts to the Department of Justice budget,
whereas the prior, ringfenced funding period
from 2010-2015 was arguably more reflective
of true policing and justice needs, as identified
by the UK Government when the powers were
first devolved.
Alliance is committed to securing a base-lined
fiscal floor, set at a level in excess of 124, as
part of the next UK Spending Review. This
process should be informed by external
independent analysis.

This historical underfunding continues to be
compounded by significant inefficiencies in
how money is spent in Northern Ireland,
including the slow rate of reform in many
areas and the distortions that come from
trying to manage a divided society. Research
by Ulster University in 2016 indicated that
division in NI costs between £400m and
£800m per annum. Alliance, of course,
advocates inclusivity and a phased elimination
of division. As referenced in chapter one, we
believe the UK Government should fund new,
comprehensive research into the updated cost
of division in NI.
Building on our Assembly Party Manifesto, in
order to maximise the impact of the Northern
Ireland budget, we believe four key areas of
reform are needed:
1

Reducing the costs of division.

2 Reforming the public sector, including early
intervention and protection.
3 Improving budget setting and scrutiny
processes.
4 Reviewing existing and potential revenue
raising options, and consideration of taxvarying powers.
For further details on what we would do in
these areas, please see our 2022 Assembly
Manifesto.

Maximising Shared Island Funding
Alliance also welcomes the Shared Island
Funding, and the support it has provided to a
broad range of projects in Northern Ireland
over recent years. Alliance will explore with
the Irish Government how this fund can be
increased and deployed to further projects in
a wider range of areas, where our shared
challenges and solutions across the island
would be enhanced by such investment.

UK PUBLIC FINANCES

PAGE 17

CHANGING UK ECONOMIC POLICY
SUPPORTING NORTHERN IRELAND’S ECONOMY

19
20

CHAPTER 3
NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY

PAGE 18

NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY

We believe Northern Ireland can become the
most innovative and dynamic regional
economy in Europe. Despite the challenges
facing us, Northern Ireland has the capacity to
become more competitive and outwardlooking.
We must build on our emerging strengths in
terms of fintech, cyber, pharma and the
creative industries, while bolstering our
foundation in advanced manufacturing, agrifood, retail and hospitality. Within an open
and market-based economy, businesses are
the driving force behind employment and
prosperity.
However, we acknowledge that relatively low
levels of productivity, skills gaps and
mismatches, infrastructure gaps, labour
market inefficiencies and high levels of
economic inactivity all need to be addressed.
Alliance will strive to exploit all trade and
business services opportunities with other
parts of the UK, on an all-island basis, with the
wider EU and, indeed, globally. Of particular
significance is how the UK rebuilds its
relationship and more closely aligns with the
EU.
Our most recent Assembly Manifesto provides
more details on Alliance’s priorities in the
devolved space, including investment in skills,
research and infrastructure, and reform of the
planning system.

3.1 CHANGING UK
ECONOMIC POLICY
The UK’s economic strategy is in need of a
cohesive and comprehensive overhaul. In
recent years, the UK economy has grappled
with a host of challenges, from productivity
levels and public and private investment to
skills shortages and labour market inefficiency.
The impact of Brexit, including increased
trade barriers with the EU, our largest and
closest market, has further hampered growth.
It’s crucial to note that the UK economy is one
of the most regionally unbalanced in Europe,
with only 3 out of 12 regions contributing to
the Treasury.

NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY

In other sections of this manifesto, Alliance
sets out our proposals for a Green New Deal
and our relationship with the EU, both of
which are central to the development of a new
economic plan.
In addition to those steps, the UK government
can take many other measures to assist the
Northern Ireland economy. Alliance MPs will
work at Westminster to secure action from the
UK Government to:
• Support regional industries by boosting
research, innovation, skills, infrastructure
and access to finance across the entire UK.
• Continue the development of broadband,
high-speed mobile internet access and
similar telecommunications projects in a
manner that ensures all parts of the UK
benefit from this technology.
• Support expansion of the British Business
Bank & UK Infrastructure Bank to perform a
strategic role in the local economy,
ensuring that viable small and mediumsized businesses have access to capital,
including in relation to environmental and
other investment with deferred returns.
• Establish a UK Export Fund for SMEs, to
enable enhanced export orientation.
• Introduce a reduced rate of VAT for tourism
and hospitality businesses.
• Create a legal duty on the UK Government
to ensure its economic policies are
assessed on their likelihood of reducing
regional inequality in the economy and that
levelling up is accelerated.
• Support ongoing delivery and expansion of
City Deals for Northern Ireland.
• Seek introduction of Regional Rebalancing
Programme for infrastructure spend across
the nations and regions of the UK, with
local and devolved authorities to be given a
say in how it is used, reinforced by Just
Transition funding for areas particularly
affected by the transition to net zero
greenhouse gas emissions.
• Seek expansion of Enhanced Investment
Zone (EIZ) funding to focus on job creation
and economic development in areas of
innovative and sectoral strength.

PAGE 19

• Invest strategically to ensure that Northern
Ireland has the skills and ability to attract
greater levels of funding from projects such
as UK Research Councils and meet
emerging labour market skills demands.
• Establish renewed partnerships between
Government and local businesses to
formalise business representation, improve
co-ordination and enable engagement
North-South and East-West.
• Review investment levels in skills, the
funding model for colleges, universities and
apprenticeships and student finance for
England – as revised outcomes may have
beneficial outcomes for Northern Ireland.

3.2 SUPPORTING NORTHERN
IRELAND’S ECONOMY
While the devolved institutions hold many
economic policy levers, the UK Government
has a crucial role to play. By working in
collaboration with the Executive and
Assembly, the UK Government can
significantly bolster the Northern Ireland
economy.

NI Trade and Exports
The UK Government has an important role in
supporting exports from Northern Ireland, as
well as ensuring UK trade deals do not have a
detrimental effect on key NI industries, such
as agrifood. This includes the appropriate
inclusion of Northern Ireland businesses on
trade missions and access to trade shows.
Similarly, fair access to export finance must be
ensured. However, there needs to be a clear
distinction between the roles of the UK
Government and Invest NI.

Promoting Dual Market Access
The Windsor Framework provides Northern
Ireland with a relative opportunity compared
to the rest of the UK that comes from
unfettered access to both the market in Great
Britain and the Irish/EU market in terms of
goods.
Alongside the Northern Ireland Executive and
Invest NI, the UK Government must take
action to promote this particular opportunity
and avoid taking any steps or failing to keep
EU law up-to-date that would undermine this
comparative advantage.
Alliance will hold the UK Government to
account with regards to exploiting all
opportunities associated with dual market
access.

Apprenticeship Levy
The Apprenticeship Levy is collected from
many Northern Ireland businesses; however,
they do not receive any direct benefits from it,
as the proceeds of the levy are collected by
the UK Government and then reallocated to
the Northern Ireland Executive’s Block Grant.
Discontent regarding the Apprenticeship Levy
has also been raised in Great Britain.
Alliance will support a general review of the
Apprenticeship Levy across the UK, and
ensure that any levy raised from Northern
Ireland is ring-fenced for re-investment in
skills.

We would support the development of a
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Department for Business and Trade and Invest
NI to clarify and formalise those roles and
linkages.

PAGE 20

NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY

Defence Procurement
Northern Ireland currently receives the lowest
share per capita in the United Kingdom of
defence contracts.
Alliance will continue to lobby the Ministry of
Defence to ensure that Northern Irelandbased companies have proper opportunities
to compete for contracts and that the local
SME sector can access related opportunities
in both Northern Ireland and Great Britain.

Levelling Up and Shared Prosperity
Alliance recognised the significant impact of
the loss of EU funding to Northern Ireland,
particularly the Structural Funds of the
European Regional Development Fund and
the European Social Fund. We are deeply
concerned that the replacement funds, such
as the Shared Prosperity Fund and other
Levelling Up Funds are controlled by the UK
Government, rather than aligned with
devolved priorities and without requisite
tailoring to local needs.

NORTHERN IRELAND ECONOMY

There has been a significant reduction in
funding to Northern Ireland, coupled with the
imposition of unnecessary and costly bidding
competitions, short-termism, uncertainty as to
the areas of activity that will be supported,
plus duplication in some areas and gaps in
others. Many core services, including
apprenticeship, labour market inclusion
measures, disability employment, regeneration
and economic development measures are in
jeopardy.
Alliance will seek a fundamental review of the
design of Levelling Up and Shared Prosperity
Funds to ensure they target the most
impactful and sustained interventions and will
continue to lobby for the resources and
responsibility for these funds to be transferred
to the Executive.

PAGE 21

TACKLING THE ENERGY CRISIS
KEY GREEN NEW DEAL COMMITMENTS

23
24

CHAPTER 4
GREEN NEW DEAL

PAGE 22

GREEN NEW DEAL

The climate crisis has existential implications
for our planet and humanity. The world, and
particularly the UK, is not on course to meet
net-zero targets of the Paris Climate
Agreement, which is considered the bare
minimum to preserve a liveable planet.
A Green New Deal recognises that tackling
the climate emergency goes hand in hand
with economic transformation and social
justice. It’s about urgently decarbonising our
economy, and in doing so, unlocking a fairer,
more resilient economy filled with clean,
affordable, renewable energy and well-paid,
secure green jobs in existing and emerging
industries.
The impacts of climate change are already
upon us, hitting the most vulnerable the
hardest. We are experiencing increasing
flooding, and changes in the natural
environment, habitats and biodiversity.
Extreme weather changes will only continue
to accelerate, causing needless financial
distress for households, businesses and public
services if we don’t future-proof our
infrastructure and meet net zero targets.
As a Party, Alliance has long recognised that
we need urgent action to overcome the
climate crisis and improve our environment
and economic wellbeing.
This is why, in 2021, we developed the Alliance
Green New Deal: our plan for a fair, green
economy.
Since we published the Alliance Green New
Deal, energy prices and the cost of living have
reached crisis point. The Conservatives have
u-turned on critical climate pledges, recklessly
approving fossil fuel expansion in the North
Sea and failing to insulate the UK’s inefficient
homes.
Furthermore, over the past 15 years, the
Conservatives have underinvested in our
economy by over half a trillion pounds when
compared to the G7 average, leaving our
public services and infrastructure in desperate
need of Green New Deal investment and
transformation.

GREEN NEW DEAL

Since the United Kingdom’s decision to leave
the European Union, it is imperative that we
reassess our progress in meeting our climate
targets. It is worth noting that while the
European Union continues to strengthen its
climate legislation, the United Kingdom’s
legislation is being weakened. We can no
longer let this be the case.
Alliance MPs will continue to demand that the
UK Government puts in place a Green New
Deal for the UK as a whole, in line with our
Alliance Green New Deal policies.
With Alliance MLA Andrew Muir now Minister
for Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs,
Alliance is leading climate action at every level
of government. This includes working towards
a specific Green New Deal for Northern
Ireland by the Executive and the Assembly,
which covers devolved responsibilities.

4.1 TACKLING THE ENERGY CRISIS
It has been estimated that as many as 45% of
homes in Northern Ireland might now be living
in fuel poverty. This is unacceptable.
In today’s world of rapid change and precarity,
we need affordable running costs for
households and resilient infrastructure and
public services that can adapt quickly and
effectively to changing demands – a
consideration that is increasingly vital, given
emerging geopolitical risks and their
associated impacts on the cost of living. This
means a national plan for massive investment
in renewables and properly insulating our
homes.
The initial expenses of overhauling our energy
infrastructure can be covered through a mix of
public and private investment, with increased
taxes on the wealthiest individuals – i.e. the
richest 1% of people in the UK with a total
wealth of £2.8tn – helping to stabilise the
economy. Reforming wealth taxes on the
super-rich has been estimated to generate up
to £50 billion annually.
Although many energy powers are devolved
to the Northern Ireland Executive, the
renewable energy industry stands ready to
bring incredible opportunities for Northern
Ireland and should be championed by
Northern Ireland’s MPs.

PAGE 23

4.2 KEY GREEN NEW DEAL
COMMITMENTS
Alliance MPs will work in close collaboration
with our Minister for Agriculture, Environment
and Rural Affairs to demand the UK
Government paves the most ambitious and
just path possible to Net Zero.
We will build on our work holding the UK
Government to account to meet, and where
possible exceed, international climate
commitments, by implementing a
comprehensive climate action plan for the UK.

• Ensuring UK Government recognises
transboundary issues in relation to
agriculture and the environment, including
in relation to marine plan.
• Strengthening the powers of the Groceries
Code Adjudicator to ensure fair trading
practices for farmers.
• Ensuring adequate funding for Agriculture,
Rural Affairs and Fisheries sectors to
enable a genuine just transition.

This includes, but is not limited to:

• Calling for enhanced funding for the Office
of Environmental Protection to ensure
adequate enforcement and on ground
presence.

• Embedding environmentalism at the heart
of planning and delivery, at every level of
Government.

• Ensuring Northern Ireland receives its fair
share of funding raised under the UK’s
Emissions Trading Scheme.

• Ending the use of fossil fuels, banning
fracking and the opening of new coalmines
and pits, and replacing fossil fuels with
renewable energy.

• Scrutinising every UK-wide energy package
to ensure it prioritises renewable energy
and acts to keep prices as low as possible.

• Demanding tax increases on fossil fuel
giants, and wealth and property taxes on
the super-rich to create equity in the tax
system and support the transition to Net
Zero and an end to fuel poverty.

• Continuing the development of the UK Net
Zero Carbon Buildings Standard and
supporting a UK-wide emergency
programme to reduce energy consumption
from all buildings, including providing
insulation to cut emissions and fuel bills,
retrofitting homes and increasing energy
efficiency of private rented sector homes
and social housing, ultimately ending fuel
poverty for good.

• Creating of a “wealth tax” for the top 1% of
UK earners who are responsible for 26
times the carbon emissions of the bottom
10%.

• Introducing UK air quality limits in line with
World Health Organisation levels to
guarantee and monitor the right to breathe
clean air both indoors and outdoors.

• Funding a Green New Deal via long term
bond issuance, ISAs and Pension Funds.

• Supporting the continued existence of the
all-island energy market, and ensure its
continued effective operation despite the
ongoing changes around implementation
due to the Protocol and Windsor
Framework.

• Upholding Net Zero goals and opposing
destructive policy rollbacks from the
Conservative Government, including
reversing new oil and gas licences.

• Requiring the UK Government to change
current approaches to spending and
taxation. See more on this in our Finance
chapter.
• Enhancing collaborative relationships
between UK Government and devolved
administrations in relation to climate policy.

PAGE 24

• Securing research and development
investment in Northern Ireland to match
other UK regions, realising Northern
Ireland’s potential as a leader in green
innovation.

GREEN NEW DEAL

• Establishing citizens’ assemblies to work
alongside the UK Government, under the
Parliament’s scrutiny, to ensure that a just
and democratic transition involves all of us,
especially those most affected.
• Strengthening just transition principles
through expanding the UK’s climate
disclosure regulations to require every UK
listed company to make just transition
plans and to involve their workforce and
trade unions in this planning.
• Scrapping the Conservatives’ anti-protest
laws to support trade unions’ right to
organise and advocate during the just
transition.

Animal Welfare
In addition to protecting biodiversity, wildlife
and habitats, Alliance has always prioritised
animal welfare and sought to tackle cruelty
against animals. People who show such
brutality are not only a danger to the animals
involved but potentially to our society as a
whole.
We will continue to pursue high welfare
standards at the UK level and to use the UK’s
influence to end global “trophy hunting” and
the trade of illegal animal products. We
remain committed to extending the ban on
hunting mammals with dogs to Northern
Ireland.

• Banning advertising for high-carbon
products.

GREEN NEW DEAL

PAGE 25

REFORMING THE VISA SYSTEM
OVERHAULING THE ASYLUM SYSTEM
PROTECTING THE COMMON TRAVEL AREA

27
28
29

CHAPTER 5
MIGRATION

PAGE 26

MIGRATION

Alliance believes in a shared and united
community. That means representing
everyone in Northern Ireland, celebrating our
community’s diversity, and upholding the
rights and dignity of all.
Migration is a normal part of human life: it
enriches our culture, opens our minds, causes
love and families to grow, and significantly
improves our economy.
Immigration must be managed, but Alliance
supports a compassionate, fair system and we
have always opposed the ‘hostile
environment’. We believe that an immigration
system can both fulfil our legal and moral
responsibilities and at the same time grow our
economy and improve our society.
The Conservative Party has used Brexit as a
vehicle to introduce an increasingly punitive,
cynical immigration system that has
threatened the rule of law, human rights, our
economy and the UK’s international standing.
The UK Government has perpetuated divisive
mistruths and anti-migrant tropes, defying
international law as well as the overwhelming
economic evidence and needs of businesses.
It has also failed to provide community
resources for integration and created an
unprecedented backlog in processing
applications.
Northern Ireland’s key sectors include retail,
hospitality and tourism, agri-food and social
care – all of which rely upon migrant workers.
Since 2019, Northern Ireland businesses have
experienced major job shortages due to the
Government’s increasingly restrictive
approach to economic migration.
While immigration policy is set at
Westminster, we also believe there is scope to
use devolved powers to boost integration and
strengthen migrant and asylum seekers’ rights
in Northern Ireland. More information on these
policies can be found in the Alliance 2022
Assembly Manifesto.

MIGRATION

5.1 REFORMING THE VISA SYSTEM
The Conservative Government has hiked up
visa fees, increased qualification requirements
and doubled the minimum salary levels to be
eligible for a visa to work in the UK. Given
lower salary levels in Northern Ireland, the
impact of this policy has been particularly
acute for local families. It has devastated and
separated couples and families, led to major
job shortages, and left untold numbers
vulnerable to exploitation.
Alliance MPs will campaign for changes so
that our economy and businesses can thrive,
families can be together, and all of us can live
and work in dignity. We will support action to:
• Reverse the increased minimum threshold
salary requirements for family visas and
make the system affordable.
• Scrap the ban on dependents for those on
a Health and Care Worker visa and student
visa.
• End punitive, unjust policies such as No
Recourse to Public Funds.
• Cut extortionate visa fees and make visa
renewals automatic and affordable.
• Repeal the Immigration Act 2020 to scrap
the shortage occupation list and pointsbased system, creating a visa system based
on the real needs of the Northern Ireland
economy and society.
• End employer-dependent visas so workers
can change jobs or leave an exploitative
employer.
• Reject the assertion that workers in critical
low-paid front-line roles are “low-skilled”
and therefore ineligible to work in the UK.
• Cap routes to settlement at five years, and
create a simplified route to status based on
five years’ residence.
• Grant overseas students two years to find
work after graduation.

PAGE 27

5.2 OVERHAULING THE
ASYLUM SYSTEM
The annual number of asylum applications to
the UK peaked in 2002, and people who
originally came to the UK seeking asylum
make up a mere 0.6% of the UK’s total
population. This small minority is not
responsible for the systemic issues in our
economy: the under-resourcing of our public
services is.
Under the current system, it is virtually
impossible to seek asylum in the UK legally,
and entering the UK via irregular journeys is
the only way people can seek sanctuary.
The UK therefore takes a tiny fraction of the
world’s refugees. Most asylum seekers stay in
the first country they feel safe. The small
minority that travel onwards to reach the UK
do so because they have ties to the country:
familial, historical and language – some have
even served with the British military, as is the
case for many Afghan arrivals.
Around 85% of refugees globally live in
developing regions, with 73% of refugees
living in countries neighbouring the one they
have fled.
Over recent years, smuggling gangs have
capitalised on heightened border security
between the UK and France and the UK’s
departure from the EU. With fewer irregular
journeys to claim asylum made by lorry and
other vehicles, asylum seekers are forced to
reach the UK via treacherous small boat
crossings.
The Conservative Government has spread the
notion that people arriving on these boats are
making bogus claims. In reality, 92% of small
boat arrivals from 2018 to March 2023 claimed
asylum, with over 86% of those who had
received a decision by March 2023 being
offered protection.

The Conservative Government’s extreme
approach to immigration is not based on
evidence and does not stop people from
entering the UK. Instead, it emboldens
smuggling gangs and puts untold numbers at
risk of death in the Channel, modern slavery,
human trafficking and exploitation in the
informal economy. In particular, Rwanda-style
schemes are impacting people’s willingness to
come forward as victims of human trafficking,
and the inability to work is causing significant
vulnerability to economic, sexual and criminal
exploitation.
The only meaningful way to reduce
treacherous Channel crossings is to provide
safe routes for asylum seekers to reach the UK
and to expand the UK’s highly restrictive
family reunification criteria.
MPs will work to:
• Restore the universal right to seek asylum
by repealing the Illegal Migration Act 2023,
Nationality and Borders Act 2022, Safety of
Rwanda (Asylum and Immigration) Act
2024.
• Abolish the Rwanda Scheme and any other
third-country forced resettlement
agreements.
• Establish safe, legal routes to claim asylum
in the UK, expanding resettlement schemes
and making it easier for vulnerable family
members to be reunited.
• Process asylum claims fairly and quickly in
a trauma-informed way, without
discriminating based on the method of
travel.
• Grant asylum seekers the right to work in
any job after three months so they can
support themselves and their families and
become active members of their
communities.
• Call for more investment for communities
to support asylum seekers and promote
integration.
• End the use of hotels and privatisation of
accommodation for those seeking asylum,
moving to a not-for-profit-based system
that’s integrated into communities and
works alongside social housing.

PAGE 28

MIGRATION

• Make providers of asylum accommodation
subject to a statutory duty to refer people
leaving asylum support accommodation
who are at risk of homelessness to the local
housing authority.
• Ensure that migrants’ and refugees’
qualifications and prior learning are
recognised to reflect need in the local
economy and to ensure they can continue
their education and find employment that
corresponds to their skills.
• Explore options to strengthen and
streamline community sponsorship.
• Call for adequate funding for the Northern
Ireland Strategic Migration Partnership
(NISMP) and improved governance across
the UK.
• Establish independent monitoring of all
accommodation provisions for those
seeking asylum to ensure adequate health
and safety precautions and safeguarding.
• Support a trial in Northern Ireland to
explore community-based Alternatives to
Detention (ATDs).

5.3 PROTECTING THE COMMON
TRAVEL AREA
The Common Travel Area is a mixture of
conventions and legal instruments that govern
movement and reciprocal rights across the UK
and Ireland. As a consequence of Brexit, it has
been placed under growing stress.

The Irish and UK Governments must work
together to protect residents’ CTA rights and
make a positive case for immigration, showing
that we can handle arrivals in a way that
unlocks economic opportunities and fulfils
international human rights responsibilities.
Alliance MPs will work to ensure that:
• The Common Travel Area is placed on a
formal treaty basis by the UK and Irish
Governments.
• Essential cross-border services be made
available to all legally resident non-EU/EEA
citizens on the island of Ireland.
• Non-EU/EEA residents who have lawful
residency in Northern Ireland are provided
“deemed permission” to cross the border
as visitors.
• A social mobility assessment is undertaken
for migrant communities on the island of
Ireland.
• The requirement for non-EU/EEA citizens
to carry and produce passports when
crossing the border and to notify
authorities of their visit in advance of travel
is abolished.
• An exemption for Northern Ireland tourism
is created under the UK’s Electronic Travel
Authorisation (ETA) scheme.
• A labour mobility scheme on the island of
Ireland is created.

Furthermore, we have seen attempts to
redefine the Common Travel Area (CTA)
based exclusively around the rights of British
and Irish nationals, resulting in unjust
restrictions on migrant communities and
reports of increasing racial profiling on crossborder journeys.
It is critical that the integrity of the Common
Travel Area is upheld and that its rights are
afforded to all those lawfully resident in the
United Kingdom and in Ireland. In
Westminster, Alliance MP Stephen Farry
successfully secured an exemption for thirdparty non-visa nationals living on the island of
Ireland from the UK’s Electronic Travel
Authorisation.

MIGRATION

PAGE 29

HUMAN RIGHTS AND CIVIL LIBERTIES
DEMOCRACY AT WESTMINSTER
EQUALITY AND SOCIAL JUSTICE
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENTS AND ONLINE SAFETY

31
31
32
32

CHAPTER 6
UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS
AND EQUALITY

PAGE 30

UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY

Human rights, the rule of law and civil liberties
have long been cornerstones of UK society.
Yet since 2019, the Conservative Government
has passed authoritarian legislation with
increasing vigour, dangerously undermining
fair process and democratic rights, and
demonising refugees, workers and climate
protestors.
Just as Alliance stands for openness, honesty
and fairness in Stormont, we will continue to
seek to enshrine these values in Westminster.

6.1 HUMAN RIGHTS AND
CIVIL LIBERTIES
Alliance believes human rights are inherent
and universal: an essential part of modern
governance that protects the individual from
injustice. The Conservatives have repeatedly
attempted to repeal the Human Rights Act
and leave the ECHR, which would have
devastating consequences for the rights of
everyone across the UK. This would have
particular implications for the Good Friday
Agreement and specific areas such as policing
and criminal justice.
It is imperative that the next UK government
restores the rule of law, civil liberties, and
equal access to justice as foundational pillars
of our society.
Alliance MPs will demand the Conservatives’
draconian anti-protest laws be scrapped and
the Illegal Migration Act repealed.

6.2 DEMOCRACY AT WESTMINSTER
The UK democratic system has long required
significant reform. Many governments have
been formed over past decades with a
Parliamentary majority but with only the
support of a minority of those who voted in
proceeding elections.
Norms and conventions of good behaviour
have increasingly been flouted, frequently
with impunity, including Ministers and others
blatantly lying, failing to be transparent, or
correcting the record.

UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY

We cannot continue to rely on conventions to
safeguard democracy and provide checks on
executive power. Alliance has long supported
constitutional change in the UK, and we
believe that can no longer be delayed.
Alliance MPs will continue to call for:
• A fairer electoral system for elections to
the House of Commons. Our preferred
system is multi-member Single
Transferrable Vote, the system we use for
all other elections in Northern Ireland.
• Votes at 16 for all elections and
referendums.
• Votes for anyone legally resident in all
elections and referendums.
• A directly elected House of Lords. Elected
representatives could be elected by
proportional representation from the 12
regions of the UK, including Northern
Ireland and would serve one or at most two
longer terms to avoid party politicisation of
the role.
• An extension of the ban on double-jobbing
to include those sitting in the House of
Lords or Seanad Éireann whilst elected to
the NI Assembly.
• UK-wide constitutional convention to
develop a fully codified constitution. This
should explicitly deal with the democratic
deficit in England following devolution in
Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales.
• Independent and transparent enforcement
of the Ministerial Code.
• Making donations to political parties in
Northern Ireland more transparent.
Changes brought by Naomi Long in
November 2013 ensured that all political
donations were recorded from January
2014 onwards. However, the Secretary of
State for Northern Ireland chose only to
publish those from July 2017 onwards, so
we still have a period of secrecy, which
needs to be addressed.
• Amending the 2014 Lobbying Act to ease
restrictions on campaigning activities by
affected organisations and to implement a
comprehensive lobbying register.

PAGE 31

6.3 EQUALITY AND
SOCIAL JUSTICE

6.4 DIGITAL DEVELOPMENTS
AND ONLINE SAFETY

In pursuing an agenda of undermining human
rights, the Conservative Government has also
failed to legislate on critical equality and
social justice issues.

Developments in how we use technology have
transformed our lives and our work over
recent years. We believe there is enormous
potential in both Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
in social media as forces for good; however,
there are significant dangers if both are not
properly regulated.

Alliance MPs will continue to advocate for:
• An immediate trans-inclusive ban on socalled Conversion Therapy, without
loopholes, that extends to NI.
• The domestic incorporation of the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (UNCRPD).
• The delivery of a Northern Ireland Bill of
Rights to supplement the ECHR and
Human Rights Act.
• A Royal Commission on drug policy to
ensure we adopt evidence-based
interventions, particularly in relation to
harm-reduction.
• Urgent, just compensation for all those
affected by the Infected Blood Scandal,
including scrutinising the operation of the
Government’s recently created Infected
Blood Compensation Scheme.
• Introduction of a statutory Duty of
Candour, which has been highlighted by
the Hillsborough disaster investigations, the
Post Office (Horizon) Scandal and others.
• Westminster to intervene when required to
ensure the highest standards of rights and
equality in Northern Ireland in line with
international standards, where the
Assembly or Executive manifestly fails to
act.

The value of AI should be harnessed in a way
that benefits society as a whole, whilst
protecting human rights. The use of AI is
increasing rapidly and has implications for
almost every aspect of our lives: safety,
democracy, work, the arts and the economy.
Linked to this, social media is rapidly
becoming a space in which people are at risk
of harm, misinformation is endemic, and
radicalisation can take hold. We are
particularly concerned about the use of
machine learning algorithms, the lack of
accountability around anonymous accounts,
and the effects of social media on children
and young people, and vulnerable adults. We
are also concerned that over-reliance on selfregulation of social media platforms, results in
varying standards of acceptable content and
levels of due diligence in respect of breaches
of standards and, consequently, inconsistency
in whether and how harm is addressed in the
online space.
We believe the new Government should:
• Introduce a Digital Bill of Rights to protect
everyone’s rights online, including the
rights to privacy, free expression, and
participation without being subjected to
harassment and abuse.
• Incorporate the UN Convention on the
Rights of the Child into UK law.
• Set up an independent advocacy body for
children’s safety online.
• Build on the measures introduced through
the Online Safety Act to introduce
verification requirements for social media
accounts.

PAGE 32

UK POLITICAL REFORM, HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUALITY

OUR POSITION ON BREXIT
IMPLEMENTING THE WINDSOR FRAMEWORK
FIXING THE UK-EU RELATIONSHIP

34
35
36

CHAPTER 7
OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH
THE EUROPEAN UNION

OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION

PAGE 33

Alliance was firmly opposed to Brexit, which
continues to be fundamentally destructive for
the United Kingdom as a whole. Most notably,
it poses vast challenges for Northern Ireland’s
economy, environment, society and wider
political stability.
In many respects, the story of the past eight
years has been a series of attempts to
reconcile the challenges and contradictions of
Brexit for Northern Ireland, which depends on
both north-south and east-west dimensions
and can only operate successfully through
sharing and interdependence.

7.1 OUR POSITION ON BREXIT
Successive attempts have been made to
mitigate the impact of Brexit upon Northern
Ireland through the Backstop, the Protocol,
and the Windsor Framework. Whilst we
helped devise many of these responses and
welcome others, we recognise that some
aspects of Brexit amount to a circle that
cannot be entirely squared. Certain problems
will either persist or not be fully solvable.
Alliance believes that there is a hierarchy of
responses to address Northern Ireland’s
relationship with the EU.
Alliance has always been open to maximising
flexibilities within those special arrangements.
Our tests remain:

Alliance is committed to the ongoing
continuance of the Windsor Framework in the
forthcoming Democratic Consent vote which
is scheduled before the end of 2024.
Alliance will seek to exploit the relative
opportunities that come from dual market
access, whilst continuing to recognise the
wider disadvantages and challenges posed to
Northern Ireland by Brexit.
Beyond the nature of the special
arrangements for the region, broader steps
can be taken to address the impact of Brexit
upon Northern Ireland through to ultimately
returning to the European Union.
Most immediately, the more the UK and EU
can improve their current relationship under
the Trade and Co-operation Agreement,
including alignment, then the easier the
interface across the Irish Sea becomes and the
softer the impact of Brexit overall. This should
include consideration of rejoining the Single
Market and Customs Union.
It remains Alliance’s policy that Northern
Ireland and the UK should return to the
European Union at an early opportunity.
Only a full reversal of Brexit can resolve all of
the tensions, contradictions and limitations
that it poses.

• Protection of the Good Friday Agreement.
• Preservation of dual market access.
• Changes being mutually agreed between
the UK and EU, and therefore legal.

PAGE 34

OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION

7.2 IMPLEMENTING THE
WINDSOR FRAMEWORK
Alliance broadly welcomes the Windsor
Framework as a mitigation of some of Brexit’s
impacts. However, we are clear that it remains
an imperfect solution, with some issues still
outstanding. We also note that it only
addresses the movement of goods and fails to
address the free movement of labour, services,
and capital.
Ultimately, closer alignment between the UK
and the EU can reduce the need for some
aspects of the Windsor Framework, and we
are open to further negotiated, bilaterally
agreed changes that can deliver improvement.
Pending further changes, we will play our role
in ensuring the implementation of
international obligations.
Alliance also recognises the importance of
Article 2 in protecting rights under the Good
Friday Agreement and the European
Convention on Human Rights. We will
continue to defend this from any attack.
Whilst we acknowledge the positive intention
of some of the measures within the
Safeguarding the Union Command Paper, we
remain concerned with the overall process
and presentation, particularly its import for UK
Government impartiality and balance with
respect to Northern Ireland political parties.
Furthermore, we are highly sceptical of the
veracity of some of its claims. Alliance will,
therefore, continue to scrutinise all underlying
secondary legislation and its evidential basis
robustly.
Alliance is clear that there are key areas where
further work with the EU is required to deliver
improved implementation of the Windsor
Framework, including:
Veterinary Medicines
The current Veterinary Medicines grace period
ends on 31 December 2025. Whilst many
pharmaceutical companies are planning at
least 18 months in advance, we support a UKEU free trade Veterinary Medicines agreement
to overcome issues and an extension of the
grace period to facilitate the adoption of a
mutually agreed position.

OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION

Not for EU Labelling
We are conscious of businesses’ major
concerns regarding this measure and
competing demands with respect to which
approach should be taken. Particularly in light
of our shared desire with other parties for a
comprehensive UK-EU Veterinary Agreement,
we will seek a grace period to defer the next
phase of goods labelling pending such an
agreement being concluded.
‘At Risk’ Test
The treatment of goods moving into Northern
Ireland deemed at risk of moving into the
European Union should remain under constant
review to find opportunities to relax how this
rule is interpreted and applied.
GB-based Businesses
Alliance will encourage the Government to
take further tangible steps to inform and
support businesses based in Great Britain
regarding the requirements for doing business
with Northern Ireland, and to promote the
minimisation of trade friction between Great
Britain and NI.
North-South Mapping Exercise
The Irish Government last conducted an
exercise to assess the impact on north-south
cooperation in 2019. Given developments
since then regarding the nature and shape of
Brexit and the particular solutions created for
Northern Ireland, and its likely impact on areas
such as skills, free movement and public
services, the UK and Irish Governments should
repeat this exercise collectively. This will help
inform future policy responses.
Democratic Deficit, Stormont Brake and
Applicability Motions
We are concerned about the nature and
operation of the Stormont Brake and
Applicability Motions. Both are blunt
instruments that come at the end of the
process of developing EU law.

PAGE 35

Significant uncertainty remains regarding how
the UK Government will respond if the
Assembly either pulls the Stormont Brake or
fails to pass an Applicability Motion.
Fundamentally, it is in Northern Ireland’s
interests to remain aligned with the European
Union on updated EU law and the adoption of
new EU law.
Northern Ireland’s elected representatives,
departments and other stakeholders should
seek to influence the development of relevant
EU law much earlier in the process. Alliance
will continue to develop such capacity and
opportunities to influence outcomes.

7.3 FIXING THE UK-EU
RELATIONSHIP
Brexit has had major consequences for the
UK, including a lower rate of economic
growth, upward pressure on costs and prices,
greater labour shortages, border friction for
imports and exports, and a loss of freedom of
movement for professionals, students, and
performers.
The deteriorating geopolitical situation
underscores the pressing need for the next UK
Government to negotiate a closer, mutually
beneficial relationship with the European
Union. The scheduled review of the Trade and
Co-operation Agreement during the next
Parliament presents a focused opportunity,
which, if seized, can bring about positive
changes.

PAGE 36

Pending formal agreements with the
European Union, it is still in the interests of the
UK to voluntarily align with the European
Single Market.
Alliance was the first party to advocate a
comprehensive UK-EU Veterinary or Sanitary
and Phytosanitary (SPS) Agreement. This
would be in the interests of the agri-food
sector of Northern Ireland and the UK
economy as a whole. Crucially, it would also
significantly reduce the nature and level of
related checks across the Irish Sea.
Other areas that should be addressed include:
• Foreign policy and security co-operation.
• A progressive return to freedom of
movement, starting with particular cohorts
e.g. performers and a youth mobility
scheme.
• Deeper policing and justice co-operation,
dependent on ongoing adherence to the
European Convention on Human Rights.
• Mutual Recognition of Professional
Qualifications.
• Merging of UK and EU emissions trading
regimes (ETSs) and Carbon Border
Adjustment Mechanisms (CBAMs).
• Joint approach on chemicals.
• Rejoining EU agencies and programmes.
• Rejoining the Erasmus Plus programme so
young people have full restored access to
study, teach and volunteer abroad.

OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION

SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
38
SUPPORT FOR THE ARMED FORCES
40
DEFENCE SPENDING AND CO-OPERATION
40
GLOBAL JUSTICE AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 41
DEALING WITH PANDEMICS
42
SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND POLITICAL FREEDOMS 43

CHAPTER 8
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

PAGE 37

International co-operation is essential to
addressing shared global challenges. Alliance
is guided by our liberal, internationalist values.

8.1 SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS

At present, the world faces its biggest range
of inter-related challenges in many decades,
with wars in Ukraine, the Middle East, and
parts of Africa, and many tensions elsewhere.

Alliance reiterates its support for the central
role of the United Nations and the wider
family of institutions within the United Nations
System and for the rules-based international
order. This includes support for the work of
the International Court of Justice and the
International Criminal Court.

This is accompanied by situations of gross
human rights abuses, humanitarian crises,
growing numbers of displaced people,
economic disruption, poverty and challenges
in respect of development, pandemics and the
climate emergency.
The nature of the international community’s
response to many of these problems,
including some significant failings, has
undermined international institutions and the
international rules-based order more
generally.
Additionally, around the globe, liberal
democratic structures are being challenged by
the rise of populism and authoritarianism.

PAGE 38

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

Conflict Resolution
War and global conflict have a disastrous
effect on international relations, economic
stability, the environment, and public finances,
and create human misery and destruction.
As a result, Alliance supports:
• Military intervention only as a last resort.
Any such interventions must be legal, have
defined aims and an exit strategy,
assurances that the result will be
sustainable, and be accompanied by nonmilitary attempts at tackling the problem.
• The “Responsibility to Protect” doctrine.
We accept that this must be a factor in
decision-making about intervention.
• Reforming global institutions, including
membership of the UN Security Council, to
better promote globally agreed objectives
and recognise the central role of the United
Nations in maintaining global peace and
security.

Gaza
The Middle East is one of the major fault lines
in the world, with a long and troubled history.
Hamas’s terrorist attacks on 7 October 2023
were abhorrent, inexcusable war crimes that
Alliance has consistently condemned in the
strongest terms possible. Israel’s response
from the outset has gravely and brazenly
breached international humanitarian law,
collectively punishing Palestinians and leaving
people in Gaza in unspeakable, apocalyptic
conditions.
Since 9 October 2023, Alliance has
consistently condemned war crimes
committed by Israel and Hamas, demanded an
immediate ceasefire, an end to the illegal
siege, and the release of hostages and
detainees. We have called out the UK’s blatant
double standards in not challenging Israel’s
breaches of international law and called for an
end to arms exports to Israel.

Both the Israeli Government and Hamas must
be held accountable for breaches of
international law through the International
Court of Justice and the International Criminal
Court. This includes ending Israel’s 57 year
occupation and 17 year blockade of Gaza, and
dismantling the systematic discrimination of
Palestinians in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories that amount to the
crimes against humanity of apartheid and
persecution.
We remain committed to a two-state solution
based on existing international law,
specifically upon UN Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) lines. This includes the
recognition of Palestine as a sovereign
independent state. Peace in the region will
come through Israel and Palestine both being
safe, secure and prosperous inside
internationally recognised borders.

Ukraine
Alliance fully supports Ukraine’s fight for
freedom against Russian aggression. We have
continuously advocated for immediate
support for Ukrainians and the ongoing
provision of military and other assistance to
the country. Any solution must have the
support of the Government and people of
Ukraine.
We will also support the most robust
economic crime legislation that will prevent
oligarchs from corrupt regimes from
channelling their money through the UK. This
would allow proceeds from the seizure of
frozen Russian assets in the UK to be
repurposed to support Ukraine.

The Israeli Government’s acceleration of its
illegal occupation and the intensification of
subjugation of Palestinians in recent years has
threatened the security of Palestinians and
Israelis alike.

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

PAGE 39

8.2 SUPPORT FOR THE
ARMED FORCES

8.3 DEFENCE SPENDING
AND CO-OPERATION

Alliance respects and values the difficult work
that our armed forces undertake. That is why
we believe several changes must be made to
ensure they are properly remunerated and
rewarded for their efforts.

Alliance continues to support NATO as the
cornerstone of the defence of the UK and
Europe.

This should include:
• An audit of the equipment and training
provided to the armed forces to ensure
that they are adequately prepared for the
various types of missions that they face.
This audit should ensure appropriate
equipment for the changing natures of
deployments.
• Provision of quality housing for armed
forces personnel and their families.
• Supporting the continuing implementation
of the Armed Forces Covenant in Northern
Ireland, including regular monitoring of the
scheme.

PAGE 40

We also advocate stronger defence cooperation between the UK and the European
Union and for a formal agreement to be
reached early in this forthcoming Parliament.
Alliance recognises the need for the UK and
other countries to increase defence spending.
We will support a full defence review in this
regard.
We believe that changing the UK’s defence
posture can yield savings. Other approaches,
reflecting the security challenges of the future
rather than the nuclear standoff of the Cold
War era, can be used to ensure the UK’s
security.
The UK can and should help combat nuclear
proliferation by leading by example in
reducing nuclear weapons as part of agreedupon multilateral efforts.

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

8.4 GLOBAL JUSTICE AND
INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
Alliance believes that the UK has both a moral
obligation and a strategic interest in
international development spending.
Countries in the Global South faced with
geographical exposure, heightened levels of
poverty, political instability, and exploitation of
their natural resources are the most at risk
from and least responsible for the climate
emergency.
As a result of climate change, experts
estimate that between 25 million and 1 billion
people could be forced to leave their homes
by 2050.
Industrialised nations such as the UK
disproportionately bear responsibility for
climate change. The UK’s global responsibility
is compounded by ongoing funding of
overseas fossil fuel projects, destabilising
foreign policy decisions and its history of
exploitation.
The 2015 Paris Climate Agreement demands
that high-income countries go further and
faster in radically reducing emissions by no
later than the “second half of this century”. It
also requires governments to reduce
emissions “on the basis of equity, and in the
context of sustainable development and
efforts to eradicate poverty.” Alliance MPs will
demand that the UK upholds its international
commitments and is as ambitious as possible
when it comes to climate action.
We want to build a fair, sustainable world:
reducing poverty and inequality, addressing
the climate crisis, and ensuring that the most
marginalised groups, such as women, girls,
people with disabilities and the LGBT+
community, are at the forefront of
international development and humanitarian
assistance policy.
Therefore, Alliance will support:
• Reestablishing the Department for
International Development (DFID) as a
standalone department.
• Restoration of the commitment to spend
0.7% of the UK’s gross national income on
Official Development Assistance.

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

• Sustaining the UK’s pledge of £11.6 billion
for climate finance over the five-year span
from 2021/22 to 2025/26, ensuring that
funds come from new and additional
sources, not international aid or
development budgets.
• An end to all fossil fuel expansion globally
under the UNFCCC, phaseout all fossil fuels
and support a just transition to renewables,
with the richest, most historically polluting
countries such as the UK moving fastest.
• NI and UK-based international
development NGOs to continue to play a
leading role in tackling poverty, mitigating
against the impacts of climate change, and
reducing violence around the world.
• The financing and delivery of the United
Nations’ 17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and the commitment made by all
UN member states to ‘leave no one behind’
by 2030.
• Tackling tax-dodging which harms the
economies of both the UK and the Global
South.
• The establishment of the new Loss and
Damage Fund under UNFCCC, ensuring the
UK pays its fair share and that fossil fuel
companies pay towards loss and damage.
• Greater investment in water, sanitation and
hygiene as a matter of priority. This not
only reduces disease and improves
sanitation but can help prevent the
development of new diseases with a global
threat, as well as impacting directly on
economic growth and inclusion. Its impact
on the safety, security, education, economic
and social participation of women and girls
is also hugely significant.
• The rights of small-scale farmers in the
Global South to gain access to land, seed
and finance, and uphold indigenous
peoples’ right to land.
• Increasing focus on human security as
defined by the United Nations
Development Programme.
• An end to all aid spending on fossil fuel
production overseas, redirecting it towards
international climate aid.

PAGE 41

• Ensuring any trade deals are consistent
with tackling climate injustice, rejecting any
new trade deals which fail to maintain or
enhance human rights and climate,
environmental, food and farming standards.
• Prevention of environmental and human
rights’ abuses in supply chains by
establishing due diligence obligations on
UK companies.
• A global climate change fund to help
ensure that low-income countries can
mitigate the impact of climate change and
support international calls for
compensation.
• UN efforts to introduce a binding
international treaty on business and human
rights, making companies legally
accountable for failing to prevent human
rights abuses or environmental damage in
their operations and supply chains.

8.5 DEALING WITH PANDEMICS
Alliance believes that we must learn lessons
from the recent COVID-19 pandemic to
enhance the response to future disease
outbreaks with pandemic potential. We must
ensure that the health service and other key
workers are better prepared and supported to
meet the challenges of another pandemic. We
will advocate for better global co-operation
from the next UK Government to mitigate and
manage outbreaks.
We value expert scientific advice and believe
that it should inform government policy to
help protect the population’s health during
outbreaks.

• The creation of much higher scrutiny and
restrictions on UK arms exports, ending
exports to countries that engage in
aggression against others and repression
domestically.
• The development of an ambitious UN
Global Plastics Treaty to mitigate against
plastic as a threat multiplier and reduce
plastic-aggravated flooding in the Global
South.
• Calls for the UK’s urgent ratification of the
UN Global Ocean Treaty and support a ban
on deep sea mining.

PAGE 42

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

8.6 SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS
AND POLITICAL FREEDOMS
Alliance respects and promotes human rights,
civil liberties, and political freedom. We
believe that these issues are universal and
must be respected by governments
worldwide. We will always seek to promote
our values abroad, promoting a tolerant world
that respects human rights and supports
political freedom.
Alliance will:
• Support the international rules-based
order, and the international structures for
protecting and advocating for higher
human rights standards.
• Continue to promote our unwavering
commitment to freedom of and from
religion across the world and oppose
discrimination on the basis of religion or
belief.
• Recognise that civil liberties and the rule of
law are a crucial part of developing stable
governments and enabling economic
growth, and ensure this recognition is
embedded in foreign affairs.

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

• Pay particular attention to protecting the
rights and well-being of women across the
world, given that women are typically
financially and politically disadvantaged in
comparison to men, and recognising that,
access to education is a priority.
• Use the UK’s role in the Commonwealth to
make progress on protecting the rights of
women, religious minorities and LGBTQIA+
people.
• Strengthen the role the international
community plays in overseeing elections
abroad so that we can continue to promote
fair and free elections.
• Continue to support the fight against
modern slavery, human trafficking and
criminal, labour and sexual exploitation.
• Improve control of arms exports and end
continued arms sales to countries with
poor human rights records.
• Increase overseas financial support for the
ongoing refugee crisis, focusing on
countries that have accepted millions of
refugees.

PAGE 43

Alliance
Leading Change

allianceparty.org
alliance@allianceparty.org
/alliancepartyni
@allianceparty
@alliancepartyni
028 9032 4274
7 Farmley Road, Newtownabbey, BT36 7TY.

Westminster Manifesto 2024

Published and promoted by Sharon Lowry on behalf of
The Alliance Party of 7 Farmley Road, Newtownabbey, BT36 7TY.
Printed by GPS Colour Graphics Ltd, 4 Marshalls Road, Belfast BT5 6SR.

Get
Involved
