DUP Manifesto A4 AW

5/12/01

4:26 PM

Page 1

DUP
Westminster
Candidates
Leadership
to Put
Things Right!

Leadership to
Put Things Right!
Parliamentary and District Council Election Manifesto 2001

PUBLISHED BY THE ULSTER DEMOCRATIC UNIONIST PARTY,
91 DUNDELA AVENUE, BELFAST, BT4 3BU
PRINTED BY J.C. PRINT LTD., BELFAST.

DUP Manifesto A4 AW

5/12/01

4:26 PM

Page 2

Dear Friend,
Unionism has paid a heavy price for the UUP
endorsement of the Republican Agenda being
delivered through the Belfast Agreement.
On each and every detail the DUP analysis of the
deal has been proved accurate. The following were
SUPPORTED by the UUP and OPPOSED by the DUP:
• Terrorists in government
• The RUC destroyed
• Murderers released
• Executive all-Ireland bodies set up
The weakness, incompetence and poor judgement
of the UUP leadership has brought us to the present
crisis. This election gives us all an opportunity to stop
the rot and start to put things right.
In this booklet the DUP programme is set forth.
This manifesto has a significance that the manifestos
of other parties do not have. It will be the mandated
blueprint to be pursued by my party. Unlike the UUP
we do not dump our manifesto as soon as the polls
close. You can trust the DUP to keep its pledges.

Your Friend,
Ian R K Paisley, DUP LEADER

2

3

DUP Manifesto A4 AW

5/12/01

4:26 PM

Page 4

Leadership to
Put Things Right!
Parliamentary and District
Council Election Manifesto 2001

CONTENTS

4

Broken Pledges of UUP reward IRA/SinnFein
DUP - United and Strong
DUP Rates Best
Massive Crime Increase Requires Zero Tolerance
DUP - The Farmers Proven Champion
Fairness and Quality in Education
Preserving Our Environment
Equality for People with Disabilities
Meeting Housing Need & Waging War on Poverty
DUP Delivers for our Senior Citizens
Promoting Ulster’s Cultural,
Artistic and Sporting Heritage
A Healthy Society - a First Priority
Tackling Transport
The Way to Secure Jobs and Investment

PAGE

6
7
8
9
9
10
11
11
12
13
13
14
14
15

5

DUP Manifesto A4 AW

5/12/01

4:26 PM

Page 6

BROKEN PLEDGES OF UUP
REWARD IRA /SINN FEIN

UUP FORCES RATEPAYERS TO PAY
FOR ALL-IRELAND GOVERNMENT

The broken pledges of Tony Blair and David Trimble have allowed IRA/Sinn Fein
to reap all the benefits of the appeasement process without giving anything in
return – not even the decommissioning of a single bullet.
IRA/Sinn Fein Ministers were placed in government and given control of half of
the Northern Ireland budget courtesy of Mr Trimble and the UUP. In past
elections the UUP has falsely said: “No guns – no government!” and “No hand
in of guns – no hand in government!” These Trimble pledges, like so many UUP
manifesto promises, lie broken and dishonoured.
The UUP Leadership simply can’t be trusted any more. Without the handing in of
illegal weaponry and the dismantling of the IRA terror machine, IRA/Sinn Fein
must be kept out of government. It’s time to send the message that the
corruption of democracy must end.
Only a vote for the DUP will signal the clear determination of
the unionist people for no more concessions to the IRA and no
more rewards for IRA/Sinn Fein.

Under the Belfast Agreement all-Ireland bodies with
Executive powers have been set up with unionists in
a permanent minority.
The despised institutions of the Anglo Irish Agreement
have been extended and enhanced as the result of the
cave-in of the UUP. The range and powers of the all-Ireland
bodies are being already being increased. An embryo
united Ireland government is being set in place in which
UUP Ministers are playing an active role.
So enthusiastic are these Ministers that they and their
UUP colleagues voted for a 7% increase in your Rates
rather than cut spending on the all-Ireland bodies!

REPUBLICANS WANT TRIMBLE TO WIN
At last you have a chance to stop the rot and put things
right. The current process of appeasement to republicanism
continues because government is able, by the acquiescence
of Trimble and his team, to perpetuate the myth that it has
the consent of both nationalists and unionists.
This election gives you the chance to say that concessions
must end and to demand a new way forward based on the
consent of the unionist people. A vote for the Trimble-led
UUP will be taken as a green light for a further raft of
concessions. Nationalist and republicans want you to vote
for the UUP to bolster their position. Don’t let them win.
The UUP is trying to cut deals and make pacts with age-old
enemies of unionism. That’s how desperate they are.
A vote for the DUP will be taken for strong
leadership to halt the concessions. You have the
opportunity to vote for a better way forward.

BRITISH SYMBOLS AND IDENTITY
UNDER CONSTANT ATTACK
Day by day our British heritage and way of life is under
attack. The symbols of the State, including even the
National Flag and the image of Her Majesty, are being
torn down.
Everything Gaelic, republican and Irish is promoted while
everything British, unionist or Orange is derided and
reviled. Traditional parades are banned and the Union
Flag can no longer fly on most days from government
buildings. The Agreement is being used to undermine
every expression of British identity.
If allowed to continue the Britishness of
Northern Ireland will be totally submerged.
Don’t let it happen!
6

RUC DISBANDED IRA MAINTAINED!
Because of UUP support for the Belfast Agreement, the RUC is
being destroyed. Yet the IRA remains intact, still carries out
violence, and is continuing to import even more arms.
The Patten Report flowed directly from the Belfast Agreement
which set out the remit and parameters of the Patten Commission.
Indeed leading UUP spokesmen welcomed Patten's Commission
and falsely assured us the RUC had been saved! The disgraceful
treatment of the RUC, including the plan to remove the title and
emblems of the force, is being done at the behest of a republican
movement which has not gone away. Increasing violence
necessitates the retention of our security forces to protect society.
Trimble unionists have destroyed the RUC.
This is your chance to reject those who have failed
the RUC and demand its retention, not destruction.

DUP – UNITED AND STRONG
All the DUP candidates are united in their unanimous
support for this manifesto. The UUP is divided and split
even on the fundamental terms of their party platform.
As a united and committed party
only the DUP can deliver the full time
vigorous and principled representation
you deserve. Others are so badly
divided they cannot even unite
themselves, never mind the
unionist people. Unity is strength.
The DUP has no division or
dissension to distract from the
vital task of defending and
promoting your interests.
We will continue to work
with like-minded unionists
to make progress on the
constitutional issues.

WORKING FOR YOUR BENEFIT AS PROMISED!
Consistent with our electoral pledges the DUP has energetically
fought to improve the living conditions of individuals, families
and communities in Councils, the Assembly, its Committees
and in Parliament.
At the same time we have maintained our resolute opposition
to IRA/Sinn Fein refusing - unlike the UUP - to give credibility
or legitimacy to representatives of armed terrorism. On the
ground the DUP is in touch with local opinion, listening and
responsive to the unionist community’s needs and interests.
The DUP constituency help and advice service is second to
none. We want to make it even better.

Help us to maintain and improve that
level of service on your behalf by voting
for your DUP candidate.

TERRORISTS REJOICE AS
VICTIMS ARE FORGOTTEN
Victims of terrorism endure a life sentence of grief and pain yet terrorists
walk out of jail early. Remember how we were told that terrorists would
stay in prison unless violence was over for good?
UUP assent to the release of unrepentant terrorists on to our streets has
not resulted in any reciprocation from the IRA. They simply demand more
concessions. Violence is still prevalent with paramilitary organisations which
have benefited from the UUP’s broken promises continuing to engage in
murder, intimidation and drug dealing.
Families and representatives of victims struggle in financial hardship,
especially relatives bereaved in the early days of the violence. Yet ex terrorists
groups are given large amounts of public money. The perpetrators of violence
are lavished with media and political adulation whilst victims and the
innocent are forgotten and ignored.
The implementation of the Agreement in this way has caused
moral standards to be lowered to appease the insatiable republican
movement. This is your opportunity to put things right.
7

DUP Manifesto A4 AW

5/12/01

4:26 PM

Page 8

Massive Crime
Increase Requires
Zero Tolerance
The release of terrorists from jail and the
rewarding of evildoers has sent a message
that crime pays. This will be a lasting
legacy of Trimble's Belfast Agreement.

DUP RATES BEST
The DUP has the best record for keeping your Rates down at both
District Council level and has tried through its votes in the Assembly
to bring down the Regional rate increase to the rate of inflation.
Other parties have been profligate with your money hiking up the
Rates without delivering the services you need and deserve.
By contrast the DUP has managed to keep District Rate levels down
whilst still maintaining excellent levels of public services. Rates are
lowest where the DUP has control. The UUP, SDLP and other parties
all voted to increase your Regional Rate by a massive 7% - nearly 3
times the rate of inflation. The DUP called for that rise to be reduced
to the rate of inflation by cutting the spending on all-Ireland bodies.
However, the UUP and the others, preferred to maintain the allIreland aspects of the Belfast Agreement rather than reduce the
financial pressure on working families. This is despite these same
parties having criticised Direct Rule Ministers for imposing the same
level of Rates increases in the past.

Human Rights
and Equality - for
Unionists as well!
Issues of equality and human rights have been largely
hijacked by those engaged in or sympathetic to
republicanism. We believe that unionism must demand
and exercise its rights and use the system created to its
own benefit.
Standing on the sidelines will not produce any advance for
our just cause. The current make-up of the Human Rights
Commission is a denial of the rights of a large section of
unionism which is totally unrepresented. Discrimination in
the appointment of the Commission against those
opposed to the Belfast Agreement means unionists can
have little confidence in its impartiality.
The scandalous denial of civil, religious and human rights
to the Loyal Orders throughout Northern Ireland, and
particularly exemplified by the stand-off at Drumcree, must
be ended. The Parades Commission has demonstrated that
it is not prepared to acknowledge and respect the basic
human right of freedom of assembly and procession but is
willing instead to acquiesce in the face of threats of
violence from republican-infiltrated agitators. The Parades
Commission must be wound up.
We believe in real and meaningful equality for
women and ethnic minorities. We hold that this
principle should be built into mainstream government
policies and not relegated to token programmes or
projects. In this way the problem of discrimination
can be effectively and resolutely tackled.

8

At every level in our society disrespect for law and the
enforcers of the law is dramatically increasing. Drug
dealing, racketeering, burglaries and violent attacks
including those on senior citizens are now commonplace.
Gangs of youths, in some areas, terrorise decent residents
and a demoralised police force is unable to provide the
protection that people need and are entitled to expect.
With a raft of 'Human Rights' legislation and
regulations governing the action that can be taken
against wrongdoers society will increasingly become
more vulnerable.

DUP - THE FARMER’S
PROVEN CHAMPION
The DUP has always championed the farmer’s case and
consistently fought for a fair deal for our farmers in Europe,
at national level and locally. We believe our farmers are entitled
to fair economic rewards and incentives.

In other communities, people, who like ourselves,
find it unacceptable that law-abiding and peace-loving
citizens are held to ransom by lawbreakers, forced the
introduction of tougher powers for policing. In New York
the policy of Zero Tolerance made a dramatic change and
similar results have been seen elsewhere.

Northern Ireland farm produce must be promoted across Europe
whilst our industry must be defended against unethical
European competitors. There should be fair rewards for the
producer and fair prices for the consumer. There must be no
question of farmers or consumers being exploited with profits
going mainly to middle-men.

Unless the gloves are taken off our
society will be the prisoners and the
lawbreakers will be in control.

The Foot and Mouth epidemic has shown up short-comings in
some current arrangements particularly in relation to smuggling
and fraud. These must be tackled with the utmost urgency.
All sectors of agriculture are suffering terribly at the present time
and urgent action is needed on a range of issues.
We seek:
• The lifting of the EU beef export ban;
• Fair distribution of milk quota;
• Fair labelling policies which are accurate and competent without
being burdensome;
• Accurate targeting of financial and social help in the rural
community;
• The inclusion of the farming community in the Rural development
programmes;
• Equal treatment under the Leader2 programme;
• A grant system to assist with farm equity development;
• A centralised economic strategy which permits flexibility with banks
during times of crisis;
• The delivery of the Pig outgoers scheme and the adequate assistance
and guidance to those who require it;
• The establishment of a Young Entrants and Farming Retirement
Scheme;
• A Farmland Planning Easement Scheme in order to achieve development
of rural land and permit farm families to live in the countryside.
9

DUP Manifesto A4 AW

FAIRNESS AND
QUALITY IN
EDUCATION NOT REPUBLICAN BIAS
The DUP believes that the
present IRA/Sinn Fein Minister
has abused his position in the
allocation of funding across
sectors of education in
Northern Ireland. Irish Medium
and integrated schools are to
be treated differently than
state controlled schools.
The Minister’s favourite
schools are to be permitted
funding once the yearly intake
reaches 12 pupils while
controlled schools face the
chop when they fall below
100 pupils. The DUP has
used the Assembly to
challenge this political use
of public resources.

5/12/01

4:26 PM

On Capital spending the picture is the same.
In his first year as Minister Martin
McGuinness spent £41.3m on schools used
mostly by Roman Catholics as opposed to
£13.7m for schools used mostly by
Protestants. In the current year the ratio was
2:1 in favour of Roman Catholic schools and
most of the money has been spent in
constituencies being targeted by IRA/Sinn
Fein at the next election.
The DUP has challenged this blatant
discrimination through questions, motions
and the Education Committee. The DUP
believes in the need to raise school
standards. There is a necessity to ensure
that the resources spent on education are
used to their full potential and that young
people are given the best educational start
in life.
• The performance of schools should be
measured and made publicly known.
• Schools should be given equal funding
regardless of which sector the schools serve.
• Early years are important since many of
the problems of underachievement stem
from the first years in primary school.
We believe there needs to be a radical
relook at the curriculum for early years and
support programmes for those families
which experience educational disadvantage.
• Resources and policies to deal with
disruptive children must be continually
assessed to see that they are being effective.
Parents of disruptive children should be
made more accountable for the actions of
their offspring even to the extent of
involving them directly in the school.
• Small rural schools should be given
support to enable them to deliver the whole
curriculum. The DUP has been successful in

Page 10

persuading the department to skew recent
money made available by the Chancellor to
small schools.
• The Review of Post Primary Education, as
set up, appears to be driven more by the
ideological demands of the minister than by
a desire to see improved education
provision in Northern Ireland.
The DUP believes that selection is inevitable
given the distribution of schools and the
perceptions which parents and children have
of various schools across Northern Ireland.
We do not accept that selection should be
based on economic or social grounds.
In looking at the most appropriate school for
a child, it is educational ability and
aptitudes which should be the deciding
factor. Since the present transfer tests are
flawed we see selection being based on inschool, though externally set, tests over the
last two years of primary school. The
experience of teachers should also be used
to guide parents in their post primary
decisions.
There should be specialist schools at post
primary level catering for different
educational abilities, with sufficient
differences in the curriculum to allow for
those differences and with the potential for
children to move between schools if
educational choices and needs change.
As far as nursery education is concerned the
present method of allocating nursery places
discriminates against parents who are
working. Many of these parents are in low
paid jobs and the absence of nursery school
places is forcing them out of work. The DUP
will continue to press for a change in the
criterion to give working parents a fairer
allocation of nursery places for their offspring.

EQUALITY FOR PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES
People with disabilities must have their rights recognised and
enshrined in the new Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland. We
are committed to ensuring that the rights and needs of people
with disabilities are respected and upheld by law if necessary.
No one should be left isolated or marginalised simply because
for their disability.
1 in 6 of our population has some form of disability and their
rights must be protected and discrimination totally eradicated.
Progress has been made but much more still remains to be done.
It is unacceptable that 70% of people with disabilities are living
on or near the poverty line and that these people are 3 times more
likely to be unemployed than their non- disabled counterparts.
It is essential that people with disabilities gain proper access to
housing, transport and the physical environment.

PRESERVING OUR
ENVIRONMENT
The DUP supports a waste management
strategy which will substantially reduce the
amount of waste going to landfill.
We have been to the fore in seeking greater protection of
Areas of Special Scientific Interest and endangered species
birds and animals.
The DUP has through the Chairmanship of the Assembly’s
Environment Committee brought about an investigation
into the safety of public transport for children travelling to
and from school. We have also been successful in
lobbying for more Road Safety Education Officers.
10

Fishing
Communities
must not be
cast adrift
The DUP is committed to having the fishing industry
elevated within the Department of Agriculture and
Rural Development. For too long fishing has been the
poor relation. The retention of our fishing fleet with
adequate and substantial funding to keep the industry
viable is essential. The right to fish is a core issue as
far the DUP is concerned.
A strategy worked up with the fishing industry should include
appropriate mechanisms to devolve decision making down to
a local level and ensure accountability.
Our fishing industry produces a top quality product and there
is clearly room for development through further processing.
Help for the fish processors will create more employment and
prosperity not only for the fishing villages but also for the
economy of the Province as a whole.
The DUP is working for the provision of a decommissioning
scheme that makes it cost effective for those fishermen who
wish to leave the industry to do so. We are also campaigning
for adequate compensation for fishermen who are forced to
“tie up” their vessels because of EU regulations and are
therefore unable to make a living at certain times of the year.
11

DUP Manifesto A4 AW

5/12/01

EXTENDING FURTHER
AND HIGHER EDUCATION
TO ALL
The DUP believes in the basic right of everyone to have the
opportunity of higher and further education if they so wish.
Promoting improved access and establishing affordability are the
key principles underpinning our approach.
Higher and further education is the medium for life long learning
offering new opportunities and options which are vital in the
development of a knowledge based economy. It is essential that
higher and further education is structured and funded to provide
the capacity to cope with change and create the ability to re-skill
to meet the needs of a changing work environment.
Enhancing and enlarging this sector and tailoring the programme
of education to meet the modern skill requirements and labour
demands is an imperative. We are committed to the improvement
in standards of adult literacy and numeracy.
We believe in:
• The abolition of full time undergraduate tuition costs;
• The introduction of means tested non-repayable grants for the
socially disadvantaged;
• A means tested discretionary loan system providing low cost
student loans
• A one-stop shop to deal with student administration;
• An increase in the number of third level education places in
Northern Ireland;
• The establishment of a N Ireland Student Endowment Fund
ands a co-ordinated approach to encourage business, industry
and all government departments to contribute to that Fund;
• Better co-ordination between further education and industry is
essential as is the tailoring of further education courses to meet
the demands of the labour market;
• Improved linkages between Schools Careers advice and
industry;
• Consolidation and improvement of vocational and basic skills;
• Development of the modern apprenticeship scheme.

PROTECTING ALL
OUR CHILDREN
We lobbied successfully for the creation of a
Children’s Commissioner. The DUP Chairman
of the Committee of the Centre at Stormont has
instigated an enquiry into the creation of this
post to ensure that the process is completed as
quickly as possible.
It is essential that the powers of the new
Commissioner are sufficient to meet the
demand for the protection and advancement of
the rights of children in our modern society.
12

4:26 PM

Page 12

DUP delivers for our
Senior Citizensbut battle is not over

Meeting Housing
Need and Waging
War on Poverty
The DUP is committed to tackling disadvantage and building
communities. In the areas of housing, urban regeneration and
through partnership with the community and voluntary sector
we are determined to bring about improvements to the lives of
ordinary people.

The DUP alone promised to bring in
free fares for senior citizens on public
transport and we alone are delivering
on that promise. We will continue to
help our older people.

• Under DUP Ministers a number of major successes have been
achieved. We stopped the practice of imposing year on year Housing
Executive rent increases above the rate of inflation We gave the go
ahead for a massive redevelopment scheme for Belfast expected to
create around 3,000 jobs. We also secured £8.6 million of funding to
promote the physical and economic regeneration of inner north Belfast
as well as the development of a comprehensive strategy aimed at
tackling the chronic housing needs in north Belfast.
• By providing further help to the elderly through increases in the
Winter Fuel Allowance and the announcement of a new Warm Homes
Scheme we set out to assist the elderly in particular.
• We have also secured the passage of new street trading legislation
to combat illegal trading.
• The DUP is committed to tackling the high levels of unfitness
especially in our rural communities.
• We are committed new legislation to combat anti social behaviour
as well as fighting to ensure that housing in Northern Ireland
continues to benefit from the current high level of investment
• The DUP will continue to work to ensure that decent, affordable
housing is something that can be enjoyed by all our citizens.
• We have set in train new strategies for urban regeneration in our
towns and cities throughout the Province through the development of
new and innovative partnerships that can take a more holistic view in
assessing problems and developing solutions.
• We are totally committed to ensuring that urgent action is taken to
strengthen areas of weak community infrastructure, particularly in
unionist areas.

Promoting Ulster’s
Cultural, Artistic and
Sporting Heritage
• The DUP supports the promotion of Ulster Scots language,
history and culture. There has been too much focus on Gaelic
culture. That must be redressed urgently. We aim to ensure
appropriate funding is made available for the Ulster- Scots
language and that a major drive is made to promote it.
We will continue to campaign for parity and equality.
• We support changes to access to the Arts so that everyone
can feel they can participate and enjoy good art. Art must be
open and accessible to people from all spheres of life.
• The Northern Ireland Film Commission can deliver jobs and
money to the Province.
• We support the bid to have Belfast declared a European City
of Culture.

There needs to be a more coherent and cohesive approach to
issues involving older people. Our senior citizens are to be valued
and respected for the contribution they have made in the past and
for the continuing role they can play.
Senior citizens are entitled to live with dignity and in comfort.
They should not have to rely on benefits or be denied access to
adequate health and social services.
The DUP will continue to work for:
•Decent levels of income for all senior citizens with the link to
average earnings for the state pension to be re-instated;
•The State Pension to be free of tax in all circumstances;
•A minimum income standard for all pensioner households as
recommended by the Social Security Select Committee;
•Special support for the over 80s with an increase in the basic
pension for this group;
•The maintenance of the Winter Fuel Allowance;
•Access to good quality affordable housing with security and
freedom from fear of crime;
•TV licences to be free to all senior citizens and not just those
over 75;
•The abolition of standing charges for electricity and telephones;
•Free NHS spectacles and dental treatment.

• On sport, the DUP believes there is vast room for
improvement to sports grounds in the Province at all levels.
• We are committed to road racing and its continuation as a
competitive sport. The safety measures being proposed and
supported by the road racing fraternity must be implemented.
• We support the restructuring of football in Northern Ireland
and call for the introduction of one administrative body
to oversee all levels of the game with greater input from
spectators.
• The rivers and lakes of Northern Ireland offer tremendous
sporting opportunities to anglers from here and further afield.
A management restructuring is long overdue to stabilise
salmon stocks and deliver on the tourism potential that exists.
Government departments need to play their part in monitoring
and restoring the habitat of our rivers and lakes.
13

DUP Manifesto A4 AW

5/12/01

4:26 PM

Page 14

A Healthy Society
is a First Priority

THE WAY TO
SECURE JOBS AND
INVESTMENT

Since IRA/Sinn Fein took control of our health service
under the terms of the Belfast Agreement there has
been one review after another. This must end. We
need a workable health service plan consisting of
primary care, area hospitals and regional hospitals.
• The DUP is committed to proper access to health services for people
in rural areas. In the south west there should be a further hospital with
acute services. Downe should also be given Acute services and the Braid
an A&E Unit.
• The Department itself should be downsized and Boards and Trusts
amalgamated as appropriate. Priority should be given to developing local
services rather than grandiose and expensive cross border services.
• There should be a robust financial structure for the NHS with the
removal of the need for annual emergency monies and the elimination
of double counting. Trust deficits must be tackled urgently.
• There should be a commitment to no more unnecessary changes to the
NHS for at least 10 years and an end to underfunding of cardiac services
and the development of an action plan for cardiology services. The full
implementation of the cancer strategy is essential.
• The reduction in increases in waiting lists which now stands at about
50,000 and a corresponding reduction in waiting times are a priority as are
adequate numbers of Consultants in each speciality and sufficient numbers
of Occupational Therapists
• Private health care should be developed to compliment the NHS not as a
competitor to it or at its expense. There should be contractual
arrangements with private nursing homes to alleviate bed blocking.
• Prescription fraud which costs over £10 million per year must be ended.
• The DUP has taken the lead in the Assembly in seeking adequate
provision for the long term care of our elderly. There should be a repeal of
the law which expects the married partners who have sufficient resources
to make a voluntary contribution towards the cost of the spouse’s care in
residential accommodation.
• A great source of grievance has been the maternity crisis brought about
by the wrong and unnecessary closure of the Jubilee. This decision is the
clearest demonstration of the mismanagement of the health service by a
politically motivated IRA/Sinn Fein Minister.

The DUP is committed to promoting economic
development strategies which will enable Northern
Ireland to compete in a rapidly changing global economy.

Tackling Transport
and Developing a
Better Province
The DUP has used its Ministerial position to
make improvements to our public transport. The DUP
alone has won free fares for older people from
October this year allowing free transport across the
Province on buses and trains. At the end of the first
year of operation we will be looking at ways to
extend and expand the provision of free fares.
•We have saved the railways. Under Direct Rule the railways in
Northern Ireland were set to close. We have now secured funding to
deliver 23 new trains and upgrading the most used lines.
•On roads DUP Ministers have created a major works preparation
pool to ensure that as soon as funding becomes available road
schemes can be built as quickly as possible.
•We have fought for and secured funding for significant capital
expenditure on road schemes and launched a scheme to make traffic
calming schemes quicker and easier to introduce.
•We have launched a review into the issue of the salting of roads
across Northern Ireland and listened to local people and where
necessary and appropriate undertaken to change local traffic flow.
•As far as our Water Service is concerned we have listened to the
views of local people about the siting of facilities and secured funding
for significant new facilities for the provision of safe clean water and
the proper treatment of waste water.
•The DUP Minister is extending powers for trust ports in Northern Ireland
to allow them to compete with ports in the Republic of Ireland and be
more competitive and has secured the future of the Port of Belfast in the
public sector, with greater powers to compete and be more accountable
to the public

14

We support policies which will build strong competitive industries to
help transform the economy from one based not just on the
manufacture of traditional goods but also high-tech, high value goods.
The DUP believes that this policy will maximise the skills built up in the
traditional sectors such as engineering and textiles. The excessive cost
of electricity in Northern Ireland places local businesses at a huge
disadvantage when compared with their competitors in GB. The DUP
will support local businesses as they campaign to lessen this cost
burden to companies both large and small.
Many businesses, particularly small organisations, find the amount
of legislation, its complexity, and the frequency of legislative change
inhibits their ability to manage the business and make it grow.
The DUP will support the business community as they seek to lessen
the extent of the red tape that is constricting economic growth.
We support the establishment of a single development agency which
will incorporate the work presently undertaken by the IDB, LEDU and
the IRTU. We will work to ensure that the new agency will be given
the resources and independence it will need to attract inward
investment from throughout the world.
Within this new structure the DUP will encourage a strategy that
continues to place emphasis on the development of small companies,
particularly in the area of product research and development.
The Northern Ireland economy has many existing successful SMEs
that deserve to be supported and encouraged along with the
development of an entrepreneurial ethos that will assure many more
business start-ups.
The DUP has already shown through its work within the Department
of Regional Development that it is committed to the radical improvement
to the infrastructure of the Province. The economic attractiveness of
Northern Ireland to inward investors must be enhanced. Good
communications are essential to the economic development of this
part of the United Kingdom and the DUP will continue to give priority
to investment in our roads and public transport.

•With regard to Regional Development we are devising a framework
for development in Northern Ireland for the next 25 years as well as a
regional transport strategy.

As the rest of the United Kingdom is the main market for Northern
Ireland goods and services we will promote policies which will increase
the promotion of the Province’s products in GB. We will also continue
to campaign against higher fuel duties, the Climate Change Levy and
the Aggregates Tax which place the Province at a disadvantage when
competing against companies based in the Irish Republic.

•Underfunding for the past thirty years has meant that our
infrastructure in Northern Ireland has fallen behind. Whilst we have
been successful in bidding for funds from the Northern Ireland block to
deliver new roads, transport and water facilities, much more money is
still needed. We will strive to deliver additional revenue and private
sector expertise whilst retaining public control.

The DUP will oppose any attempts to
integrate the Northern Ireland economy with
that of the Irish republic for political purposes
whilst encouraging companies to export
goods and services south of the border.

For more information, contact:
DUP Party Headquarters
91 Dundela Avenue
Belfast BT4 3BU
Telephone: (028) 9047 1155
Fax: (028) 9047 1797
email: info@dup2win.com
Or visit our web site:
www.dup2win.com
15
