FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
for the 2017 Westentneter Election “DUP

a] ™
i —
[ / ‘a
t this election, we seek a mandate for the Union that really Unionism needs its strongest team.
—_ matters — the Union with Great Britain — to make sure Northem Ireland need ionist voice leading from th
- Northern Ireland gets the best Brexit deal and to reach en em lrelany nl ee hone vorce heen hart e

/ f an honourable and not a one sided deal to get the Assembly up and ont to protect our placein the union and to get the best deal for
i { running again to deal with the real problems that are faced by people Northem Ireland.
i 4 in their everyday lives. We are that voice.
) HH . f The choice at this election is clear. If you want unionism to be We are proud to be standing strong for Northern Ireland.
Peaa ep 4 A strengthened then you should unite around the strongest
, Hh g unionist party.
iH] if ¢ A vote for DUP candidates is the strongest unionist vote.

hh 7 f
fi Hi] iy 4 Now, more than ever, unionism needs to speak with one voice. Rt Hon Arlene Foster MLA
i, } q y/ f Leader, Democratic Unionist Party

| Make no mistake, elections matter. On this occasion our votes may
ii) f y not be required to help form a government at Westminster but the
Hi 4 e implications for politics in Northern Ireland could not be greater.
Hard AB What we need is a mandate for unionism, for a deal to get Northern
i in I Ireland back on track and for the restoration of the Assembly and

{ t hd Executive.
i i S How people vote at this election and how many seats we have will

i! determine not just individual Members of Parliament but the shape
i and direction of our country thereafter.
r

|

|

\

|

™. oe
4 e need a‘Team Northern Ireland’ on the benches In the previous parliamentary term, the DUP team used its influence,
es of Westminster. Only the DUP offers the people of in public and private, for the benefit of people in Northern Ireland. For
Northern Ireland the team that can maximise our example, the fight to save working tax credits protected the incomes
ss influence. No other party will be large enough to break through and of 100,000 people here. We also used the previous term to develop
ensure Northern Ireland's voice is heard loud and clear. positive working relationships that the DUP is committed to building
ee ae on in the next term.
a i Our job will not be to refight old battles, the people have spoken.
Itis our job to use our mandate and our influence to get the best deal On 8th June,a vote for the DUP team is a vote to send ‘Team Northern
' *: lal for Northern Ireland on the issues that matter like the Budget and Ireland’ to Westminster. It is a team that has real influence and
me Pe 4 ™ leaving the EU. experience in speaking up for the interests and needs of Northern
ie 5 Ireland. It is this team and this party that is working and delivering
bs for local people.
= “ At this election, we re-dedicate ourselves to doing it again.
Rt Hon Nigel Dodds
Deputy Leader, Democratic Unionist Party
|
|
|
|
ry
i -

Westminster 2017 Westminster 2017
Restoring
Devolution Now
The Democratic Unionist Party believes that Northern Ireland needs a working
Assembly and Executive as the best form of government for all of our people.
Stormont is far from perfect but it is immeasurably better than what happened
before or what would replace it. The progress we have made should not be
easily cast aside to be replaced by uncertainty with power transferred to
unaccountable Direct Rule Ministers.
There are 5 pressing reasons why we need devolution restored immediately.
*To help achieve the best deal for Northern Ireland as the UK + To attract investment and jobs — it is no coincidence that our Immediately after the election on 8 June the negotiations aimed at OUR 10 COMMITMENTS IN NEGOTIATIONS
leaves the EU — at precisely the time when Northern Ireland’s voice record levels of inward investment have happened during a sustained restoring devolution will recommence with a view to establishing a 1. We will work to avoid Direct Rule and get local aovemment back at
needs to be heard loudly and clearly the Northern Ireland Executive period of devolution. Having stable structures at Stormont with local new Executive by 29 June. : Stormont as quickly as possible 8 s
has not been formed. If we are to deal with the challenges and seize Ministers leading efforts to sell Northern Ireland internationally has We will enter these negotiations with a postive approach and a goal
the opportunities that leaving the European Union presents then we helped us secure thousands of new jobs. Without devolution, all of the of seeing the Assembly and Executive restored. 2. Our demands in negotiations will be proportionate to those of
need our own local Ministers lobbying London and Brussels. efforts to reduce our rate of Corporation tax will have been for nothing. Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein.
. .. Political stability is key to our future economic success. We will not draw any red lines or preconditions but will judge any
+To get a Budget put in place — Northern Ireland is in unchartered potential deal against 5 core tests, 3. As has been the case since 2007, we remain committed to working
territory where senior Civil Servants are making public spending THE STRONGEST, MOST EXPERIENCED UNIONIST TEAM READY constructively and in partnership with all those who are in an
decisions and not elected politicians. Sinn Fein’s Finance Minister left FOR NEGOTIATIONS Executive after an election.
post without proposing a Budget. Key public services and — most Immediately after the General Election, we will enter another round ., . . . |
importantly — the people who rely on them, need a Budget to be set of negotiations. The DUP will place the interests of the people of ibuibeg eae) wo increase chy ee fey . 4. Wewill respond positively toany Proposals to increase .
so they can get the support they need. Northern Ireland first in those negotiations. We will not draw any red octhem SET GES siiilrel position within transparency, accountability and will help the institutions function
lines or put any roadblocks in the way of seeing an Executive formed (etait Lebar more effectively.
+ To progress much needed health reforms — our National Health straight away. ator . . . . Ce
Service faces unprecedented pressures, The DUP kick started much . CEMA GEES TAS Northern 5. We will not compromise on fundamental unionist principles in
needed reforms aimed at creating a new model of health and social Itis absolutely imperative that voters use this election to not only Web remaining auillent these cue arder to retain power.
care and reducing bureaucracy and streamlining structures. Those send a clear message that they want to see Stormont restored but also Unistlethgy 6. We will not permit the rewriting of the past or the persecution of
reforms are now effectively on hold with challenges like waiting lists give unionism the strongest possible hand in the talks. No other Party 3. Is the agreement fully compatible with our British the security forces.
mounting. People should not have to wait any longer to have those has the strength, unity or experience of delivering for unionism that citizenship?
reforms implemented and problems tackled. the DUP possesses. 7. Weill oppose any Border Poll outside the terms of the Belfast
4. Will the agreement result in better government Agreement.
+ To protect and improve our education system — the impact of Unionists remember what it was like in the past when Sinn Fein and policies for the people of Northern Ireland than
not having an Executive in place is already being felt across our school were able to advance their radical republican agenda in negotiations, return to Direct Rule? 8. We will stand over those proposals for reform as set out in our
system. Having an Executive up and running is critical to resolving aided and abetted by weak unionists. This all changed when the DUP ‘Making Stormont Work Better’ document which have not yet been
the funding crisis facing our schools thus ensuring that we prioritise started to lead unionism. Since 2003, the DUP has slowly but surely 5. Isthe agreement consistent with the mandate we delivered.
frontline funding for our schools so that all our children receive the regained ground for unionism culminating in the Stormont House received for our Assembly manifesto in March? 9, We will work to ensute the full implementation ofthe Miltary
best educational start in life. It is vital that we build on positive and Fresh Start Agreements. Covenant in Northern Ireland,
practical reforms in education. a .
Sinn Fein have sought to use their mandate at the last Assembly For ease of reference we set out the 10 commitments for negotiations 10.We will honour all previous commitments we have made on the
election toblock the re-establishment of the Assembly, to demand which were endorsed on 2 March. basis that republicans will honour theirs as well.
a destabilising Border Poll and to push their agenda. It’s time for
unionists to come out and vote so the real voice of Northern Ireland
is heard. The DUP needs a strong mandate to stand strong against
Sinn Fein’s demands.
6 7

Westminster 2017 Westminster 2017
? Increasing Family
Our national and local economy has been improving steadily over the last number
of years. Indeed, Northern Ireland is performing better in some aspects than the
rest of the UK. The DUP believes that it is essential that the benefits of economic
growth are felt by everyone, everywhere. An improving economy must not
just be for the benefit of big companies or confined to London and the South
East. Growth must also have a meaningful and positive impact on the lives of
hardworking families in every part of our nation.
We welcome the fact that median gross weekly earnings for full-time 1. INCREASE THE NATIONAL LIVING WAGE 3. FREEZE THEN CUT OR ABOLISH THE TV LICENCE AND REFORM 5. AFFORDABLE ENERGY
employees increased by 2.2% in Northern Ireland last year. That The newly introduced National Living Wage (NLW) has helped increase THE BBC Paying for oil, gas and electricity can consume a significant chunk
made it the second consecutive annual increase in inflation adjusted family incomes across the United Kingdom. Whilst acknowledging The TV licence fee is a highly regressive tax which was designed for of household budgets. perception exists that electricity prices in
earnings in the region. We want to see continued improvement in the pressures that the NLW can place upon small businesses, the DUP a different era and a world of communication that no longer exists. Northern Ireland are high. Whilst prices are undoubtedly high for the
earnings and incomes. believes that it can have a positive impact on working families, help The success of Netflix and Amazon streaming services shows that largest industrial customers, our approximately 800,000 domestic

lift people out of poverty and make work pay. subscription based media can and does work. customers pay just below the EU average for their electricity and
We understand that it will be the responsibility of the Party that forms - . ; considerably lower than their counterparts in the Republic of Ireland.
the next Government to bring forward a Budget that encourages The DUP supports: An independent Commission should be established to conduct a
economic growth and protects our society’s most vulnerable. The DUP review of how the BBC is structured and the services it provides and The DUP wants to see our energy companies place further downward
proposes measures aimed at increasing family incomes that we seek IH Continued increases in the National Living Wage; and to examine alternative funding models, identify the opportunities pressure on household bills. We will support efforts to better control
to have included in future Budgets. IN Firm action against companies who fil to pay their staff the NLW. for competitive tendering of key services and produce a plan that energy bills and will seek to ensure any such measure operates in

, will either significantly reduce the licence fee or abolish it. Northern Ireland.
2. FURTHER INCREASE THE PERSONAL TAX ALLOWANCE
a 4, PROTECTING PENSIONS 6. SAFEGUARDING UNIVERSAL BENEFITS

The DUP were frontrunners in proposing increases in the personal tax . . . . .

allowance, We firmly believe that the gradual increase in the personal The DUP has always advocated for the interests of our older people. The DUP is proud of the universal benefits we have introduced in

tax allowance has been positive forall taxpayers but especially for In the Northern Ireland Executive, we have introduced initiatives like Northern Ireland like free public transport for the over 60s. Some

the lowest paid, taking them out ofthe tax system entirely and free bus passes and have defended their retention against those who parties have once again placed universal benefits like the winter fuel

hugely beneficial for thousands of people from Northern Irland would take them away. We will continue our staunch support for allowance in their sights. The DUP will resist any assault on these

In Pariament, we will support proposals to further increase the : pensioners in the new Parliament. important universal benefits.

personal allowance. The DUP will:

1 Support the maintenance of the pensions triple lock’; and
1 Support an end to the unfair treatment of women pensioners.
8 9

Westminster 2017 Westminster 2017
Creating a Globally
5 Competitive Economy
Northern Ireland’s economy - like the rest of the United Kingdom’s - is heading
in the right direction. Key economic indicators show sustained progress across a
range of important areas:
1 Our unemployment rate and economic inactivity levels have fallen 2. AN INDUSTRIAL RENAISSANCE IN NORTHERN IRELAND 3. SELLING NORTHERN IRELAND TO THE WORLD 4. MAKING TOURISM A £1 BILLION INDUSTRY
significantly since their peak during the downturn; Northern Ireland has a rich industrial heritage. The DUP wants to build Increasing exports and improving trade links will play a huge part in Northern Ireland has developed hugely in recent times as a must visit
: ; ; on our strong manufacturing base and encourage a renaissance in Northern Ireland's economic future. While Northern Ireland has been destination for visitors from around the world.
I Growth of 1.696 in the last year driven by the private sector; Northern Ireland industry, the best performing region for exports in the whole of the United ;
IB Spendi R h & Devel rose by 24% last year t Kingdom, we must build on that success and begin the groundwork The DUP supports the development of anew Tourism Strategy for
oso villen Saat Nh Tose by arorast year fo The DUP supports the delivery of an ambitious new Industrial Strategy needed to capitalise on the trade opportunities that the UK leaving Northern Ireland o take the industry here toa new level and reach
milion — an alltime nigh for Northern Ireland which is aimed at increasing our competitiveness the EU will present. Thats why the DUP introduced an International our full potential. A Tourism Strategy should:
IB Exports by Northern Ireland companies increased by 6% in the and ensuring inclusive growth. ANorthern Ireland Industrial Strategy Trade Plan which included: IE Introduce a Capital Investment Fund for the development of new
past year — the highest increase of any UK region; must be aligned to the wider UK Industrial Strategy and be centred on: tourism products;
anew Trade Advisory Board; "
1 Manufacturing sales increased by 6% in the last year and jobs in I Accelerating innovation and research; i
these ig by 1ddeaed y ye I I the appointment of Northern Ireland Trade Ambassadors; a Greate a Tourism Development Fund to Support the growth of
le sector grew by 1.4%; an IB Enhancing education, skills and employability; tourism businesses with an export potential;
vi ; a I the expansion of Invest NI’s international presence in up to 10
1 External visitor numbers increased by 12% to 2.6 million. I Driving inclusive, sustainable growth; more Iostons , . IN Establish a Market Access Fund to encourage businesses to
. . tes participate in marketing activity;
We are determined to build on that success and continue the positive a
. - P Il Succeeding in global markets; and I the creation of new trade, investment and innovation hubs in key
development in our economic fortunes. This is our plan for the fobal markets:and IN Seta target of 3,000 new hotel beds; and
Northern Ireland economy. 1 Building the best economic infrastructure. global markets;an
lect wi Ii Establish a new Air Routes Task Force.
While some seek to talk Northern Ireland down we see huge potential i a Trade Accelerator Plan including an enhanced range of initiatives
. we to help support both new and existing exporters to explore new
in our economy. Northern Ireland has world class capabilities in ‘
Lcaiaainenielban PAVING 108s | sectors such as cyber security, agri-foods, advanced engineering and markets We will also pursue:
wren rea has hae ‘ing inno von materials handling. By taking a long term, ten years plus view, we can I The abolition of Air Passenger Duty; and
job creation and record levels of inward investment. Between i F Gi
Ny 2016: become a globally competitive economy built upon a renewed and The DUP supports the roll out of the International Trade Plan and we
. reinvigorated industrial base. will ensure that the new Department of International Trade works @ Acutin the VAT rate for tourism businesses.
42,500 new jobs were promoted We will also continue to press HM Government to create Cty Region closely with Invest NI to, for example, include more local companies in
UK wide trade missions to help them develop international business
1H 64% of those new jobs were outside of Belfast Growth Deals for Northern Ireland. 9 ae
portunities.
BH £3 billion of employment related investment was secured We will lobby Her Majesty's Government to:
i help market Northern Ireland internationally through its agencies
The DUP wants to build on that outstanding success by: and embassies across the world:
i Reaffirming our pledge to create 50,000 new jobs by 2021; ll establish a Freeports policy targeted at economically
I Implementing the Economic Inactivity Strategy; and underdeveloped parts of the UK
IH Reducing Northern Ireland's Corporation Tax rate to at least 12.5%. IH encourage international events to be staged in Northern Ireland;
and
1 continue to incorporate Northern Ireland prominently in UK
branding.
10 1

Westminster 2017 Westminster 2017
5. A SECURE AND SUSTAINABLE ENERGY SUPPLY FOR NORTHERN 6. MAKING NORTHERN IRELAND THE BEST PLACE TO DO BUSINESS 7. SECURING THE SKILLS TO SUCCEED 8. KEEPING NORTHERN IRELAND WELL CONNECTED
IRELAND Northern Ireland is already a great place to do business. Whether it is Astrong skills base has been a substantial element to Northern Ireland’s Investment in infrastructure is crucial for economic competitiveness
Northern Ireland needs a secure and sustainable energy supply a start-up or an inward investor, Northern Ireland offers companies a recent economic success. In an increasingly competitive global economy, —_as well as providing a boost for the local construction industry. Given
for both domestic and business customers. While concerns have lower cost base, loyal and skilled workers and sensible regulation. The itis often the skills and talents of our people that positively differentiate Northern Ireland's geographical location, improved digital and transport
been highlighted about the future security of supply of electricity DUP wants to build on that hard-earned reputation and make Northern Northern Ireland from other possible investment destinations. connectivity remain key to building a world class economy.
in Northern Ireland, the DUP believes that this can be addressed by Ireland not just a good place but the best place to do business. Investment in skills must continue if Northern Ireland is to continue to ;
continued progress on interconnection, market integration and the Wewil secure jobs and investment. The DUP will
A 5 fe will support: | ;

development of new generation capacity. Weare encouraged by recent The DUP supports IN Support expansion at Heathrow as the UK's aviation hub with
planning applications for new power stations and see this as a sign that BH Keeping the cost of doing business low by maintaining Industrial increased air connectivity to Northern Ireland;
the market is responding positively and that the issues with security of De-Rating and the Small Business Rates Relief; HH Further investment in job focused skills schemes like Assured - ae ;
supply can be addressed. | . Skills and Future Skills to provide potential investors and existing Im Seek an independent investigation into ferry price structures on

, ; BH Reducing the rate of Corporation Tax to at least 12.5%; employers with the skilled workers they need to grow; North Channel and Irish Sea routes between Northern Ireland and
The DUP also believes that a comprehensive new Energy Strategy Great Britain;
is needed to deal with security of supply as well as the future of BB Introducing a new Better Business Initiative that will systematically IA digital skils revolution in our schools colleges and universities
renewable energy policy in Northern Ireland. review health and safety legislation working in concert with toenable young people to become digital citizens, digital workers 1 Develop a comprehensive Broadband Infrastructure Plan to roll out

sectors such as construction; and digital makers, ready for the modern economy: high speed internet connectivity across Northern Ireland;
The DUP supports: 9 ready Yi
mA ens : ; for Norther relan: 1B the maintenance of the present workers rights framework and I Continued delivery ofthe reformed apprenticeships and youth 1 Continue to press the mobile telephony providers to invest in their
comprehensive new Energy Strategy for Northern Ireland; for the UK to lead the way in improving this framework as it has training systems; networks ensuring 4G provision across Northern Ireland and that we
IX Continued progress on the Integrated Single Electricity Market throughout its history; ; ; are at the forefront of future 5G investments; and
dthe North South fi . | . . 1 Efforts to deliver a better deal for NI business from the ; .
and the North South Interconnector; UK wide tax policy improvements to encourage economic growth Apprenticeship Levy; IN Establish the new Northern Ireland Infrastructure Fund as quickly as
Improved interconnection with Great Britain; and in Northern Ireland; and . | . | . possible.
. . Increased involvement of industry in shaping the skills agenda; and
, . BB Assistance from HM Government to attract FDI into Northern
Bh The development of new generation capacity. . . . .
Ireland. Better alignment of third level courses with the strong and emerging
sectors of our economy.
12 13

Westminster 2017 Westminster 2017
Improving
Public Services
The DUP has a track record of positively reforming public services and
streamlining the political system. Due to our determination, we have delivered:
IB areduction in the number of Government Departments from 1 ANATIONAL REFORM PLAN FOR NORTHERN IRELAND 3. PROGRESSING HEALTH REFORMS 5. SAFER STREETS AND SMARTER JUSTICE
12109; The DUP believes that all parties should agree to the creation of The DUP were in the driving seat in developing ambitious, far sighted Maintaining law and order is one of government's primary duties. The
a structured, long term, cross-government National Reform Plan reforms for our National Health Service in Northern Ireland. These DUP supports the justice family across the United Kingdom in the fight
_areduction in the number of Special Advisors; for Northern Ireland including measurable targets and agreed reforms including the Bengoa Panel's recommendations for anew against crime in all its increasingly complex guises. The DUP supports:
a . implementation dates. model of health and social care, and proposals to eliminate a layer of a _ .
= sreaucion inthenumber of MLAs per constituency fom 6 to 5; ° . | bureaucracy by abolishing the HSC Board are much needed. The DUP The adoption a ‘Problem Solving’ approach in our courts;
Elements of a National Reform Plan for Northern Ireland could include: supports these reforms and wants to see them progressed as a matter I A measure of protection forthe Police in future Budgets;
a reduction in the number of Councils from 26 to 11. I alternative models of service delivery such as increasing the use of urgency. Similarly, our Health Service needs a properly resourced ; _
of social enterprises; plan to reduce waiting lists and a dedicated Transformation Fund to MH Anincreased focus on cyber crime;
The DUP has also been the driving force behind a series of public BB aGivi Service Reform Plan: suppertreform. @ the introduction ofaNl Register of Animal Cruelty Offenders :
sector reforms which are aimed at developing a more effective and : Health is fundamental to every person in Northern Ireland. The DUP and the seriousness of these animal cruelty offences reflected in
more efficient government. These include: a more digital government; will continue to strive fora situation where key decisions about the the sentences handed down by courts;
a Civil Service Voluntary Exit Scheme yielding annual savings of I expanding shared services provision; and enhancement ofthe NHS in Norther Keland are re fom party polis, the PSNI in their efforts to target criminal gangs and ensure
approximately £100 million; they have all the powers necessary to seize assets of paramilitary
a dedicated Change Fund to stimulate reform. godfathers
HE a Public Sector Reform Architecture including the NI Public Sector 4, GIVING EVERY CHILD THE CHANCE TO SUCCEED
Innovation Laboratory; and The DUP is committed to defending and improving our education
oo. . . . 2.A GOOD BUDGET SETTLEMENT system in Northern Ireland to ensure that every child has the
BH a suite of internationally renowned Shared Services which have The DUP will ih . opportunity to succeed in life.
saved the public purse hundreds of millions of pounds in reduced ighthard at Westminster for a Budget settlement that
office, IT, procurement and energy costs. allows for real lad health and education spending over ‘We will fight for sufficient resources to be provided for frontline
; ; 7 the next parliamentary term and will prioritise these areas in future schools budgets, and for greater autonomy in decision making
Reforming public services is not solely about realising efficiencies Northern Ireland Budgets. for schools, We support academic selection, the maintenance
so that Northern Ireland can live within its means. It is also about of the Dickson Plan, and greater value being placed on
delivering a more effective public sector and freeing up resources to vocational qualifications. We will focus on tackling educational
be spent on priorities lke schools, hospitals and policing. underachievement through support for early years interventions,
The DUP wants to continue to reform our public sector. This is our n expanded childcare strategy and community based initiatives.
Plan to improve public services in Northern Ireland. The DUP supports equality of treatment for all education sectors,
including removal of discrimination in teacher employment, as well
as increased shared education across all education sectors.
14 15

Westminster 2017 Westminster 2017
5 Defending Our Nation from
The DUP does not believe that the present defence arrangements for the United 4, CYBERSECURITY LEADER FOR THE UNITED KINGDOM 8. RESISTING ATTEMPTS TO REWRITE THE PAST
Kingdom are adequate enough to cope with the emerging threats in the 21st Cybersecurity is recognised as the current dominant threat to global Ninety percent of the deaths in the Troubles were by paramilitaries
Century. We appreciate that in a time of significant challenge to public finances, security. Part of the growth of the knowledge economy in Northern yet the balance of investigations is disproportionately against former
almost all areas will be affected, but more consideration needs to be given to Ireland has been a specialism in the area of cybersecurity. The DUP police officers and soldiers. A one-sided approach only serves those
prioritising the funding of defence. In order to afford it some protection, the DUP believes this is a critical area where Northern Ireland could contribute who want to re-write the past.
supported the UK maintaining the NATO target of 2% of GDP for the Defence ® Seas msaeung ‘heat oe ce support the Itis only natural that the public are outraged to see former soldiers
. . . expansion of cybersecurity research in Northern Ireland,
Budget, despite reservations about the funding formula. , y y who stood against the brutal terrorism of the early seventies instigated
A REVIEW OF THE MILITARY COVENANT by the IRA now being hounded while many of those who hid behind
However, it would be unwise to allow the present funding, strength 1. A NEW NATIONAL SECURITY AND STRATEGIC DEFENCE REVIEW te thern Ireland is part ofthe United Kingdam with both an balaclavas avoid justice.
and plans for our Armed Forces to become the accepted norm. History When the public finances improve we believe it will be appropriate to a ie re . 8 hn ‘i F eum i ion a nh i i, ~ Th Defence Select Committee “Investigation int
demonstrates that re-growing defence capability in times of national have a new National Security and Strategic Defence Review. The 2015, contribu ‘on 0 our me orees an eDU10 Our me orees or e recent erence >ered mm ees repor mves gation into
crisis is both disproportionately expensive and to late Review demonstrated a lack of strategic ambition and was too much the protection they provided in the successful execution of Operation Fatalities in Northern Ireland involving British Personnel” recommends.
” a product of expenditure limitations. The DUP believes that such a Banner. These are why fulfilling the Military Covenant is particularly Government bring forward a statute of limitations, following a DUP
It should be remembered that the NATO target is intended as a review needs to be honest about the ature of the threats we face and important for us. led debate in Parliament. The DUP also managed to secure Committee
minimum figure not a ceiling for Defence expenditure. There is also ai i backing to extend such a proposal to include members of the Royal
legitimac i the charge tat the UK has ony maintained the 2% the consequences offaling to deal with them, Only then can we make We believe thatthe Military Covenant should be reviewed and updated. Ulster Constabulty and othe security personnel,
taet though anew settion ofDefence spending Inthe next the difficult choices about capability and affordability. The DUP supports the introduction of Independent Commissioners :
term, it is expected that the UK public finances should improve. When In terms of military doctrine, we believe our military capability should n the four parts of the United Kingdom toensure the Covenant s The last twenty years have been marred by the completely imbalanced
. . . ae . a . fully implemented. The DUP is conscious how equality legislation in treatment of those who terrorised our society compared against
we achieve this we believe Defence should be one of the priorities for be driven by the ability to act alone in defence of our own strategic .
A . A , F a jorthern Ireland has been used to hamper the fulfilment of both the rave service personnel who ensured they would never succeed. Early
new investment. interests in places like the Falkland Islands whilst also continuing to be Northern Ireland has b dtoh the fulfilment of oth th b tw dth id 4. Earl
. the naaf choice to our allies, primarily through NATO. tn our spirit and the practical elements of the Covenant here. It wishes to see release of prisoners, a maximum two year sentence for fresh terrorist
Recent harrowing events in Manchester highlight the fact that the miltay capabilities, he DUP elas Thecathoest staffing training this situation ended and Veterans in Northern Ireland to be treated convictions, odious On the Runs legislation and a secretive scheme to
strategic threat of the Cold War escalating to a nuclear conflict has and equipping ofour reserve forces must be a priority " equally to Veterans right across the United Kingdom. issue letters of immunity have all tarnished the process of justice.
been replaced by a multiplicity of threats, both conventional and : Our troubled past 1y be dealt with effectively in an honest and
unconventional, and not just from states but also from trans-national 6.BRINGING ARMED FORCES DAY TO NORTHERN IRELAND hot Troubled’ pas when e Ia “i bly vey yi a an
jroups of linked terror movements. This has triggered the emergence 2. MAINTAINING OUR INDEPENDENT NUCLEAR DETERRENT, AND Itis unacceptable that Northern Ireland has never hosted the main olistic manner, not the partial way republicans would wish. We must
np 59 i NUCLEAR PROLIFERATION ensure that the past cannot be rewritten. Government should go ahead
of a multitude of terrorist threats and precipitated the current . . national event for Armed Forces Day in the UK. The DUP wish to see . p oe . 9 .
migration crisis in Europe. Additionally, Jihadists returning to the The DUP has consistently supported the maintenance of the UK's Northern Ireland host the main national event at some point in the life and publish their draft legislation so the new Historical Investigations
United Kingdom represent a new and highly dangerous threat. This independent nuclear deterrent and will continue to support Trident’s of the next Parliament and regularly thereafter. Unit can commence its work as soon as possible. We will do everything
as . : renewal. One of the reasons for the need to renew is the systematic we can to assist innocent victims to obtain a measure of justice.
means the capabilities of our Defence and Intelligence infrastructure failure of thei ‘onal ity to deal with the f
needs strengthened with a focus on the ability of our forces to deploy allure ofthe international community to deal with the issue of 7. A REVIEW OF THE PRESENT TERRORISM LEGISLATION
rapidly and to adapt to emerging threats. nuclear proliferation. We believe the UK should use all international The DUP believes that considering the multi-faceted evolving and
. . . . forums to completely overhaul the approaches to counter proliferation insidious nature of the terrorist threat it is time to review whether
We must not ignore dissident Republican terrorists and the threat and support efforts to prevent the likes of North Korean dictatorships present arrangements need to be updated or upgraded.
they pose to all our citizens in Northern Ireland and Great Britain. from gaining and distributing such technology.
The intelligence community and our security forces must be given a This review should include:
budget and rales of engagement that enable them notonlyodeter 3 PLAYING AFULL ROLE IN INTERNATIONAL MILITARY AND BH An update egal famewark or inteligence ed ant-terovism
the threat from Republican splinter groups but also to actively pursue SECURITY RELATIONSHIPS rn oe
such terrorists and defeat them investigations and operations in the U.K.
° The DUP supports our participation in NATO but shares the American ,
This is the DUP’s Plan to strengthen the UK's Defences and support concerns that other members are consistently failing to fulfil the I AUK wide definition of a victim which excludes perpetrators.
service personnel and veterans. minimum spending target. The Russian state is becoming more HH Changes to the glorification of terrorism offences with an
belligerent in its actions based on its assessment of western political examination of the 20 year time limit
and military weakness. This pattern of behaviour will only be arrested
by a reversal of both of these weaknesses. BH Consideration of intelligence and security committee membership
16 tepresenting all regions of the UK 17

Westminster 2017 Westminster 2017
Getting the Best Deal for Northern
6 Ireland from the UK leaving the EU
WHY WE SUPPORTED A VOTE TO LEAVE: The DUP’s decision to support leaving
the European Union was based on principle and practicality. The DUP had
opposed joining in the first place, had been consistent in its scepticism throughout
our membership and fully supported the question of membership being put to
the people of the United Kingdom. This was the demonstration of our
commitment to principle.
In terms of practicality when the then Prime Minister David DURING THE NEGOTIATIONS THE DUP WANTS TO SEE
Cameron attempted to achieve tangible reform of the European AFOCUS ON THE FOLLOWING PRIORITIES AND OBJECTIVES:
Union we supported this initiative. In our previous Westminster 1, Successful outward-looking knowledge-based economy in 16. Local input into new UK agriculture and fisheries policies which It is in the interests of all in Northern Ireland that the UK-EU
manifesto the DUP stated: ren oe saat
Northern Ireland can offer sustainability and new growth opportunities negotiations progress well and that the trade elements
“We support the current UK Government pledge to renegotiate 2. Ease of trade with the Irish Republic and throughout the European 17. Particular importance of agri-food sector to Northern Ireland commence as soon as possible. The stronger and more positive
elements of our relationship with the European Union.” Union economy recognised and reflected the agreements reached, especially on trade and customs
relationships, then the better for the particular circumstances
The deafness of the EU institutions to change in those negotiations 3. Maintenance of the Common Travel Area 18. Strong protections for agri-food to guard against vulnerabilities to of Northern Ireland
meant that this process did not deliver the fundamental reform the A. Strengthened relationships across the four components parts of the cheap inferior imports
EU required. Therefore, with no reasonable alternative available, the ie , + .
rn United Kingdom with no internal borders 19. An appropriate support programme for our farmers should
DUP chose to maintain its stance and advocate for a leave vote. inue aft \
5. Northern Ireland-specific solutions achieved through active continue after we leave
Some would seek to make this a re-run of last year’ referendum. Executive engagement 20. Effective immigration policy which meets the skills, labour and
Our job now is not to refight old battles but to use our mandate and it
} 9 6. Particular circumstances of Northern Ireland with a land border security needs ofthe UK
our influence to get the best deal for Northern Ireland.
with the EU fully reflected 21. Rights of British citizens in the EU and those from EU member
The ems departure from the “ee ia 7. Frictionless border with Irish Republic assisting those working or states living here safeguarded
inevitably brings with it opportunities as well as challenges. travelling in the other jurisdiction 22. Energy market stability
Whichever way people voted in the referendum last June, and 8. Progress on new free trade deals with the rest of the world 23. Effective, time bound transitional arrangements where necessary
whatever concerns they may still have we can all unite to ensure . .
Northern Ireland's interests are promoted. % Comprehensive free trade and customs agreement with the 24. Higher and further education continuing to attract international
European Union expertise and collaboration
For our part we will work to getthe best deal for Northern Ireland, 10. Northern Ireland established as a hub for trade from Irish Republic 25. Ability to opt-in to EU funds where proven to be cost-effective and
recognizing that we share a land frontier with the Republic and the into the broader UK market add value
particular circumstances of our unique history and geography.
; 11. Customs arrangements which facilitate trade with new and 26. Continued participation in funding programmes that have been
The circumstances of Northern Ireland are well understood and existing markets proven to be of benefit and are open to non-EU members e.g.
working together sensibly we have the opportunity to secure a i
ed , y Pp y ‘12. Confidence and capacity within local businesses to maximize research funding
good outcome that delivers for everyone. a
opportunities 27. Fair share for Northern Ireland from dividends from leaving the EU
In the new Parliament, Northern Ireland needs to have a strong, . . . ae os aa . .
: " 9 13. Business to retain competiveness and not face additional costs 28. UK wide skills and infrastructure funds should be established to
united DUP team arguing the case for our people, lead with an emphasis on regional specialisations
14. Arrangements to facilitate ease of movement of people, goods P a Ps
and services 29. Jurisdiction of European Court of Justice ended and greater control
15. Proportionate regulatory regime which can promote over our laws restored
competiveness, with legislation to suit our local needs 30. Positive ongoing relationship with European Union in keeping
with Article 8 of Lisbon Treaty.
18 19

Westminster 2017 Westminster 2017
The role and importance of identity is an increasing issue of discussion across the
Western world. The development and impact of globalisation had led many to
assume that identity was inexorably fading away. This is not true. The desire to
be from somewhere remains inherent in many and played an important role across
many recent elections. Simply put, identity matters.
Ina Northern Ireland context, the DUP Leader Arlene Foster has OUR BRITISH IDENTITY 3. Recognition and Support of Military Service OUR ULSTER IDENTITIES
commenced an ongoing process of engagement around how identity Within this context there are four broad areas where progress is. Our Armed Forces, their sacrifices and their achievements are a The Ulster-Scots heritage, language and culture and Orangeism have
is treated in Northern Ireland. The aim of this is to develop a real sought. These include: central and continuing bond. The debt that is owed to these men and both made a huge contribution to our own local identity as well as
respect agenda on the issue of identity here. women is expressed through the Military Covenant. The inequality having a significant impact beyond our shores. However, their birth
1. British Symbols that sees veterans In Northern Ireland not enjoying the full benefits and strength remain here.
Respect does not mean simply acceding toeverything asked for or For significant periods of recent history, there has been a consistent of this covenant is not something that the DUP considers in any way
demanded by different groups or communities. Instead, itis a dialogue attempt to reduce the display of British symbols. This process was acceptable. Thus,a framework to: 1. Ulster-Scots heritage, language and culture
of what is wanted, what s needed and what canbe practically delivered particularly aggressive in Northern Ireland. It was commonly referred I ensure its complete fulfilment: When you consider the breadth and depth of the Ulster-Scots identity
to ensure the expression of an identity and its successful communication to.as’hollowing out Ulster’ Britishness" but the process was not p! qi the range of measures and opportunities that could be pursued
tothe next generation. In this cilogue, an important place must be exclusive to Northern Ireland. I support research on veterans’ needs and acting on its islong, Atits core there must be reform and resourcing of the
made for our growing minority ethnic communities to ensure their recommendations; and Ulster-Scots Agency, refocusing of the Ulster-Scots Broadcast Fund
contribution to our diversity and to integrate into our society. More recent times have shown a greater desire to display national and fulfilling the 2003 promise to create an Ulster-Scots Academy.
While the desies ofthe lsh language community have been symbols in the public realm and greater embracing of Britishness. proper structures with ongoing oversight, These developments would facilitate the likes of language promotion,
highlighted it would be a mistake to assume that this means there Norther reland has been excluded from this process for example, is required. “ourism initiatives, capital investment, cultural networks, diaspora
. . an Northern Ireland's flag legislation has seen a consistent reduction in development, social economy projects, inclusion in the education
is contentment with the present identity settlement amongst the days while Nationalist ministers blocked a simpl like th a 7 - , ” -
variety of cultural expressions in Northern Ireland, The commentary lays while Nationalist ministers blocked a simple measure like the Likewise, to encourage our future contribution to the military our system and bespoke courses, academic research and digital and
and manifestation of disrespect isnot exclusive to one identity Union flag on driving licences, rejecting even an opt-in option. Cadet services in Northern Ireland should receive comparable support broadcasting growth.
or one form of expression. An obvious example is the continuing Therefore, there is a clear desire that this exclusion of Northern arrangements as elsewhere In UK and the development ofa new . 20 .
targeting of Orange Halls for physical attack while political parties, Ireland from these positive developments for the public expression of Army Museum in Northern Ireland should be seen as an opportunity . rangeism . . oo.
with cheerleading from sections of the media, attack any public funds Britishness ends, for significant development. Itis a continuing contradiction that despite all the talk of rights in
going to them " . Northern Ireland many of the same people are silent about or opposed
2. National Celebration and Commemoration 4. The Commonwealth to freedom of assembly. Public expression by parades is central to
In the spirit of contributing to a genuine discussion and development of The celebration and commemoration of important national events Our membership of the EU meant the Commonwealth and its Orangeism but over the years regardless of who was on the Parades
areal respect agenda the DUP would see a number of areas of concern are central to the maintenance and promotion of a common identity. contribution was often overlooked. Its peoples have contributed Commissions the end result has been the same. Namely, the exclusion
that need to be addressed. The DUP believes these reflect the identity . . ee : so much to the diversity of modern Britain and is an international of Orangeism from ever greater areas of public space. This is regardless
Y The full enjoyment, celebration and/or participation in them needs
concerns of different cross-sections of those who support Unionism and . . . network we must utilise better at pursuing our mutual interests. of engagement or not or compliance or not and often rewarded
to be guaranteed. Examples of how this has not been occurring are
in some cases beyond it.It does not claim to be exhaustive or prescriptive . : . The role and contribution of the Commonwealth should be better violence. Thus the DUP is committed to a new start on parades.
Homecoming parades, the Armed Forces Day National event and the
for all different identities here but to contribute to the discussion and Battlefield Tours programme. There were demonstrations against promoted in our schools. Northern Wreland should seek to host
development of a real respect agenda. Homecoming parades. Northern Ireland has never hosted the main Commonwealth political and sporting events and maximise the range
. 7 . of sports in which Northern Ireland teams participate.
These concerns fit within three broad categories: national event for Armed Forces Day, unlike every other constituent
1H Our British Identity part of the UK. Schools from Northern Ireland have only just started Beyond these themes the DUP would also like to see the development
HH Our Ulster Identities Participating on a pilot basis in WW1 Battlefield tours. These of a UK equivalent of Co-operation Ireland promoting the linkages
HH Our Pride in Northern Ireland commenced elsewhere in the UK in 2014 and NTs exclusion was the across the constituent parts of the country.
result of Sinn Fein’s control of the education and cultural ministries.
20 21

Sinn Fein have used their mandate at the last Assembly election to
demand a destabilising Border Poll, to push a republican agenda and
to block the re-establishment of the Assembly. It’s time for unionists
to come out and vote so the real voice of Northern Ireland is heard.
A vote for the DUP is a vote ...
The pride in Northern Ireland that many feel in what we can achieve
together or individually is something the DUP wishes to promote and
believes would be attractive to a broad cross-section of people in Northern
Ireland. This would include:
1. Celebration of Northern Ireland's Centenary
Despite an agreement of Executive support for the ‘Decade of Centenaries,
this led to little practical action. The DUP does not want that to be the case
in 2021. It will be a clear opportunity for us to celebrate what has been
achieved in the previous 100 years but equally to look forward to what
we want to achieve in the next century.
The programme for this should include a public holiday, public art, an
“Expo, centenary wood and greenway, securing of major sporting events
and practical measures to demonstrate our values such as ‘baby boxes’ If you want the DUP to be Northern Irelana’s voice at Westminster
and awards for centenarians, so we can stand up for unionism, speak up for Northern Ireland,
2. Recognition of Northern Ireland and stop Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein from dictating the political
The recognition of Northern Ireland can be given practical effect in a number agenda, then you must send that message by voting for the DUP.
of ways, for example:
Within our museums, a narrative of a global, positive and innovative =
Northern Ireland that achieved economic success and is dedicated to >|
regaining such a position again; | d
Recognition for the symbols associated with Northern Ireland; and ll
Recognition of Northern Ireland sporting bodies, the Olympic team
should be referred to as Team UK and the freedom for athletes to choose SH A i
their national team. _—
___ Use your vote to unite around the biggest
and strongest unionist party. Vote DUP!

f) facebook.com/democraticunionistparty
hy @duponline
Contact us:
DUP Headquarters
91 Dundela Avenue,
Belfast, BT4 3BU
T: (028) 9047 1155
E: info@mydup.com
3
z
=
2
si
2
STANDING E
STRONG :
“DUP .
www.mydup.com z
