DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 1

DUP
Westminster
Manifesto
2015

Including
The Northern Ireland Plan

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 2

Introduction:
The Broader Context
This manifesto concentrates on the issues which are the responsibility
of the United Kingdom Parliament. In this document we set out where
the party stands across a range of important issues such as the national
economy, defence and the UK constitution.
Self-evidently, the DUP will not be in a position to
form the next UK Government. Indeed, we have
already ruled out playing a part in any coalition.
However, our votes could be vital in the formation
of the next government. That is why it is important
to set out where we stand on these matters.
It would be unrealistic for us to prepare a manifesto
with a view to it being a detailed programme for
government for the UK as a whole, but we will only
be prepared to support a party whose proposals
taken as a whole are in the best interests of
Northern Ireland in particular and the UK in general.

This manifesto does not stand in isolation. It
should be read in conjunction with the DUP’s
Northern Ireland Plan which details our agenda
in the event of the negotiations which will likely
follow the General Election.
The next Assembly election is scheduled for May
2016. At that time we will publish a comprehensive
manifesto which addresses the wide range of issues
which are devolved to the Northern Ireland Assembly.
We therefore do not seek to cover matters that are
the responsibility of the Northern Ireland Assembly
in any great detail as part of this manifesto.

We are conscious of the fact that DUP MPs will only
make up a small percentage of all Members of
Parliament. However, we expect the national parties to
accept the mandate of the people of Northern Ireland.

2

3

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 4

Leader’s Message
Our Vision: Our Plan:
Our Northern Ireland

Deputy Leader /
Parliamentary Party
Leader’s Message

Northern Ireland has a unique opportunity with the likelihood of a hung
parliament and our MPs having an important role at Westminster.

Parliament is the institution that makes many of our laws. Its decisions help
determine the shape of the national economy. Its decisions determine
Northern Ireland’s budget. Its decisions determine how much government
takes out of, or puts into, your pocket. Its decisions determine when our
Armed Forces are sent to war. Its decisions determine our relationship with
the European Union and immigration policy.

We’ve been listening to people and communities across Northern Ireland.
We share people’s views about what is needed and what they want for
Northern Ireland and for their future.
We believe our vision, our plan and our manifesto
can deliver the best opportunities for Northern
Ireland. Our five point plan seeks to:
g

Make Northern Ireland an economic powerhouse

g

Deliver world class public services for
our people

g

Create a society based on fairness and
opportunity for everyone

g

Make politics and government work better
in Parliament and Northern Ireland

g

Strengthen the United Kingdom and
protect and enhance our British identity

For us to deliver our plan we need a strong team
of DUP MPs returned to Westminster to negotiate
the best deal for Northern Ireland and strengthen
the United Kingdom.

This is the vision we have for Northern Ireland;
the vision that drives us forward; the vision we
work for every day; the vision that will transform
Northern Ireland within the Union. It needs
the strongest team in Councils, the Assembly,
in Parliament and in Europe.
We will keep Northern Ireland moving forward.
The DUP team is committed and resolved to
stand up for you, for Northern Ireland and for
the United Kingdom.

Over the past five years the strong DUP team in
Parliament has been working closely with our
colleagues at Stormont and in Europe. This work
was vital in Northern Ireland steering its way
through the worldwide economic crisis.
In 2015, the DUP, as the party of Northern Ireland,
has an unparalleled opportunity to shape those
decisions. Every poll and every pundit is predicting
a hung parliament and our votes will be vital. The
more votes the DUP has, the more seats the DUP
can have and the more influence Northern Ireland
will have.

This is Northern Ireland’s opportunity to contribute
and shape British life like never before.
It is an opportunity for Northern Ireland’s voice to
be heard in London like never before.
This is our opportunity to stand up for Northern
Ireland like never before.
The DUP will seize every opportunity for
Northern Ireland.

The DUP is not beholden to any national party.

Rt. Hon. Peter Robinson MLA
Leader, Democratic Unionist Party
First Minister of Northern Ireland

We are the only party with a post-election plan to
make the most of this opportunity for Northern
Ireland. Only the DUP can deliver. Sinn Fein doesn’t
go to Parliament. Other parties and independents
will be too small to count.

Rt. Hon. Nigel Dodds OBE
Deputy Leader & Parliamentary Party Leader,
Democratic Unionist Party

We want to create a shared and united Northern
Ireland that is economically prosperous and
dynamic – a Northern Ireland that plays a full
and active role as part of the United Kingdom.
We will fight for the interests of everyone in
Northern Ireland.

4

5

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 6

1

Public Spending,
the Deficit and
the National Debt

The DUP has a sense of perspective on the role it may play on the issues
of determining public expenditure, the deficit and the national debt. The
responsibility for producing a detailed plan will fall to whichever national
party becomes the government. The role of the DUP, as for other minor
parties, will be to exert as much influence as possible on the government’s
programme in return for support. For our part we have already published
The Northern Ireland Plan which details policies and proposals which would
form our agenda for discussions with any prospective party of government.
With all the resources at their disposal, none of the
national parties have yet produced a detailed, fully
costed and independently verified plan on these
three intertwined matters. The manifestos become
an indicator or aspiration that will be subject to
inter-party negotiations. Nonetheless it would be
unrealistic to imagine that the direction set by one
of the two main national parties will not form the
substantial element of a programme for government.
Public spending, the deficit and the national debt
will therefore be determined by two key factors:
Firstly, the strength and sustainability of our
economic recovery and secondly, the political
arithmetic and realities of a post-election parliament.
Our experience suggests that – whether in the
immediate aftermath of the election or when
key votes take place in Parliament – the party
of government will seek our support. In these
circumstances the DUP has been open and
transparent about what it wants. We have set out
our five principles, published the Northern Ireland
Plan and produced this manifesto. Inside or outside
a formal arrangement we will seek to advance as
much of this agenda as we can in our dealings
with the national government. We will seek the
best deal possible to strengthen Northern Ireland.
6

In broad terms, to secure strong and lasting growth
in our economy we believe it best if government
invests in the drivers for growth – enterprise,
innovation, skills and infrastructure – to sustain and
build the economic recovery. As a responsible party
we want to see the budget deficit eliminated. However,
we recognise that the rush to reduce and eliminate the
deficit can have an impact on growth. After five
years of sustained and deep cuts, the DUP believes
that any further significant reductions to front-line
services in areas that affect Barnett consequentials
would be harmful.
Among the fundamental budget requirements for
Northern Ireland that we will campaign for are:
g

A budget settlement which will allow real term
increases in health and education spending over
the next five years without decimating other key
public services.

g

Capital investment to make our schools and
hospitals fit for the twenty-first century.

g

Assistance to continue the reform and
transformation of our public services.

Welfare Reform and Pensions
The DUP, in the Executive, has brought forward
proposals that protect people in Northern Ireland
from the bedroom tax. We want the remainder of
the United Kingdom to gain parity with Northern
Ireland. The DUP, in Parliament, will therefore
support the abolition of the spare room subsidy.
Universal Credit must be allowed to bed down,
enabling a proper evaluation of its impact. The best
mechanism to reduce welfare spending is economic
growth – getting those who can work, into work.
Thus, the DUP will assess any welfare proposal on
these three tests:
g

Will it incentivise work?

g

What protection does it provide for those most
in need?

g

What impact will it have upon the costs of
administration?

Tax evasion –
Aggressive recovery that is properly resourced
We support the introduction of a more aggressive
and targeted recovery strategy that is properly
resourced.

Value Added Tax and the Hospitality Sector
The DUP will oppose any increase to VAT rates or
upward re-categorisation of goods. The UK currently
applies one of the highest rates of VAT on hotel
accommodation in Europe. It is hampering the
development of this key sector. The hospitality
sector should be re-categorised and benefit from
a reduced rate. This will help the sector pay for
capital improvement works providing a boost to
the construction sector.

Proposals such as taxing disability benefits would fail
such tests.
The DUP supports the triple lock on the state pension
and will oppose plans to means test present universal
benefits for pensioners.

7

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 8

2

A fair share of
the growing
economy

The DUP is a low tax party. It has worked hard to help family incomes by
blocking water charges, delivering the lowest household taxes in the United
Kingdom and helping to create thousands of new jobs.
The Great Britain and Northern Ireland economies
are growing again and growing quicker than most
parts of Europe. Despite this progress, many
hardworking families are still not feeling any real
benefit flowing from the economic recovery. The
DUP wants everyone to get their fair share of this
growing economy.
Our national government must therefore use the tools
at its disposal to ensure that those who suffered during
the downturn enjoy real benefit from this new growth.
Increase the Minimum Wage
The Low Pay Commission (LPC) has stated that the
value of the Minimum Wage grew between 1999 to
2009 but has fallen since. The next government must
take advantage of low inflation and the growing
economy to restore its value. It should work with the
LPC on a five-year plan to restore the real value of
the Minimum Wage. This plan would ensure the
lowest paid receive above inflation rises over the
next five years.
Increase the Personal Tax Allowance
The DUP will support proposals to raise the personal
allowance to at least £12,500 by the end of the next
parliamentary term. This measure benefits all
taxpayers but takes the lowest paid out of the tax
system entirely.

8

Freeze then cut or abolish the TV licence and
reform the BBC
The licence fee is a highly regressive tax. It was a tax
designed for a different era and world of communication
and entertainment that no longer exists.
An independent Commission should be established to
conduct a review of how the BBC is structured and
the services it provides. The aim of the Commission
should be to consider the role of the BBC as a public
broadcaster, to examine alternative funding models,
identify the opportunities for competitive tendering
of key services and produce a plan that will either
significantly reduce the licence fee or abolish it
altogether. There may be consequential changes for
the management of the new structure.
Abolishing Air Passenger Duty
Air Passenger Duty (APD) has a disproportionate
impact on the regions farthest from the most
prosperous South East. The duty therefore harms
Northern Ireland’s business and tourism sectors.
It hurts family incomes and harms our economy.
The exemption of children from the tax is a partial
admission of the negative impact it places on
passengers. As the duty is a disincentive to travel –
it is bad policy.

More and better paid jobs
For those in poverty, a paid job delivers better
economic, social and health outcomes. Northern
Ireland has an unparalleled record of job creation.
Equally important a high percentage of those jobs
have been well-paid. Unemployment has now fallen
in Northern Ireland for 27 consecutive months.
The DUP believes in social mobility and raising
people out of poverty through work; the higher the
salary the better – for the employee, our economy
and Northern Ireland.
The DUP promoted policy of devolving corporation
tax setting powers to the Northern Ireland Executive
will help deliver tens of thousands of new jobs. This
will enable Northern Ireland to become an economic
powerhouse and a beacon of economic success
within the United Kingdom.

Supporting you and your family
As in the rest of the UK, many families in Northern
Ireland struggle with the cost of childcare with some
paying up to one third of their family income every
month creating financial pressures for working
families. We support the introduction of a range of
measures that would limit the cost of childcare to a
maximum of 12% of family income. This will be
achieved by supporting a Northern Ireland-wide roll
out of affordable models of childcare, supporting
childminders and private provision. However, to
achieve a target of no more than 12% would also
require enhancements and new proposals at a UKwide level.
We support increasing the amount of help available
under the new UK-wide tax free Childcare Scheme
and identifying a range of other UK-wide measures
including through the tax system to support families
with high childcare costs.

Over the next parliamentary term Air Passenger
Duty should be abolished.

9

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 10

3

Leading the Way on
the Northern Ireland
Economy

Rebuilding
In the past five years Northern Ireland has shown
its capacity to attract investment across the globe.
We have been steadily rebuilding our economy
and repairing the damage of the global collapse.
Despite often difficult circumstances, the DUP has
delivered record levels of investment and for 27
consecutive months the unemployment claimant
count has fallen.
g

Over the last four years, the Northern Ireland
Executive has helped to create over 22,000
new jobs.

Rebalancing
Sustained growth in the private sector – particularly
export-led growth – will act as the main catalyst for
rebalancing the local economy. This will be achieved
through:
g

Negotiating more satisfactory terms in relation
to Corporation Tax.

g

UK wide tax policy improvements to encourage
economic growth in Northern Ireland.

g

Assistance from the UK Government to attract
FDI into Northern Ireland.

g

Support from the Northern Ireland Executive
has resulted in over £3.4 billion investment.

g

Northern Ireland businesses getting a fair share
of national government contracts.

g

The number of people unemployed has fallen
from 67,000 in December 2010 to 45,000 today.

g

Increased infrastructure investment to assist in
preparing Northern Ireland for the future.

In the last year Northern Ireland has been the
most successful location in the UK for attracting
foreign direct investment per head of population.

g

Northern Ireland has become a “go to” location
for global companies, with more firms investing
here than during any similar period in history.

g

The UK Government encouraging international
events to be staged in Northern Ireland.

g

Northern Ireland being prominently incorporated
into UK branding.

g

Ensuring that Northern Ireland maintains its 100%
regional aid status.

g

Support to help reduce electricity costs for
business customers.

g

g

Much has been done but there is much more to do.
Northern Ireland was once an economic powerhouse
with Belfast being one of the world’s leading
industrial locations. We want to re-establish
ourselves as world leaders in this new era.

10

Help from the UK Government to market
Northern Ireland internationally through its
agencies and Embassies across the world.

g

Innovate UK establishing a Northern Ireland
presence.

g

Ensuring that schemes developed by the
British Business Bank are tailored to suit
Northern Ireland.

g

The fundamental reform of zero hours contracts
including the removal of exclusivity.

g

Ensuring energy security in terms of supply and
cost to both consumers and businesses in
Northern Ireland.

g

g

The DUP supports:
g

The expansion of airport capacity in Southern
England. We believe that Heathrow is the best
solution, but we will support the
recommendations of the Airport Commission.

g

The opportunities of open data and new
technology to change completely the way we
deliver services.

Enhanced connectivity to Great Britain including
guaranteeing direct access from Northern Ireland
to London’s hub airports.

g

The public, private and social economy
sectors working closely together to maximise
economic growth.

An independent investigation into ferry price
structures on North Channel and Irish Sea routes
between Northern Ireland and Great Britain.

g

A feasibility study into a tunnel or enclosed
bridge across the North Channel from Larne to
the Scottish coastline.

New Partnerships for World Class Services
The DUP has encouraged greater innovation in the
public sector through the Public Sector Reform
Initiative. The DUP supports:
g

Connectivity
Northern Ireland’s transport connections and
networks are vital for our growth.

Expansion of the social economy as a valuable
resource for improving the prosperity of our
communities and lessen reliance on grant funding.

The DUP recognises the vital importance of ensuring
Northern Ireland has world class digital connectivity
across both our urban centres and rural communities.
Without such connectivity investors will not invest in
Northern Ireland and many of our local businesses
will not be able to grow to their full potential. It is
essential we maintain and develop the digital backbone
within Northern Ireland and our digital links with
Great Britain, Europe and the United States.
The DUP will continue to press the mobile telephony
providers to invest in their networks ensuring 4G
provision across Northern Ireland and also ensuring
Northern Ireland is not left behind with further
technological developments.

11

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 12

4

Traditions
and identity

Marking the Decade of Centenaries
The DUP will seek to ensure Northern Ireland is a full
participant in the Centenary Events Programme. The
poppy installation at the Tower of London caught
the public imagination and became a 21st century
iconic image of Britishness.
The DUP proposes that this can be further marked by:
g

Extending to Northern Ireland a scheme to support
school visits to World War 1 battle sites and
curriculum support similar to those which have
been introduced in England.

g

Bringing the arrangements of the Community
Covenant Grant into line with every other region
of the United Kingdom.

g

A national commemoration of the Battle of
the Somme.

g

The extent of flag flying has changed over the years
with all-year displays becoming more common. The
DUP proposes:
The Union Flag should be displayed on an all-year
basis from key public buildings throughout the
United Kingdom.

g

The Union Flag should be displayed on driving
licences across the United Kingdom.

g

The International 2 and 3 letter signifier for our
country should drop GB and adopt UK.

g

The British Olympic Association should change its
name to Team UK or use its full name Team GBNI.

12

The legal responsibility for parades lies with the UK
Parliament. With the present system so intrinsically
biased against the Loyal Orders there is a disincentive
for republicans to negotiate either at a senior political
level or in localised areas. This imbalance needs to
be addressed.

Service Together
The National Citizenship Service should be further
developed and remodelled. It should include a yearlong youth development programme working in the
four capital cities of the UK.
By the end of the parliamentary term, there should
be a plan to expand this into a national nine month
programme with a place for every young person
between 16 and 24. This should include the options of
spending that time in the Armed Forces or travelling
to another part of the UK to participate in
programmes.

The DUP wants:
g

Celebrating the centenary of Northern Ireland in
2021 and the commissioning of an official history.

National Flag and Symbols
The most basic expression of our national identity is
the display and use of symbols in the public realm.

g

Parading
The DUP has worked closely with the Loyal Orders
to deliver positive benefits. The DUP has already
delivered the de-rating scheme for Orange Halls,
changed the compensation scheme to help halls
damaged in sectarian attacks and secured the
grounds of Stormont for the Ulster Covenant
Centenary parade.

A new start on parades including the abolition of
the Parades Commission. We will work alongside
the Loyal Orders to achieve this.

Deepening the bonds
A new charitable body should be established and
resourced by the UK Government to promote
linkages between the four constituent parts of the
United Kingdom, based on the model of Co-operation
Ireland. This organisation would be charged with:
g

Promoting exchanges and linkages between
schools, youth organisations and civic groups.

g

Promoting a national historical narrative for the
United Kingdom and its global impact including
the contribution of its four constituent parts.

g

Supporting school visits to the national
parliament, devolved bodies and major public
buildings and institutions (Buckingham Palace,
National Arboretum, Whitehall Cenotaph, Imperial
War Museum, National Portrait Gallery).
13

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 14

5

Strengthening
Inter-Governmental
Relationships across
the United Kingdom

We have built strong and solid relationships with the
major Westminster parties to allow us to maximise
our influence. We want to strengthen the United
Kingdom as a whole. The DUP calls for:

6

Make politics
and Government
work better in
Northern Ireland

For us to deliver the kind of changes and
improvements that we want to see, we will need the
support of Westminster to make sure that politics
operates better in Northern Ireland. The DUP wants:

The principle of devolution to be respected by
Westminster.

g

A guaranteed seat at the Cabinet for a Secretary
of State for Northern Ireland.

g

g

An agreed guaranteed minimum level of
representation for Northern Ireland in the House
of Commons.

g

Legislation to reform the structure of government
in Northern Ireland.

g

g

A fair deal for all four parts of the United Kingdom
to strengthen the Union.

Allowances removed from parties who refuse to
attend the House of Commons.

g

g

National UK departments to carry out
administrative operations in Northern Ireland.

A level playing field by banning all political
donations from outside the UK.

g

A new relationship between the regional
administrations and the National Government.

g

Arrangements to ensure Northern Ireland’s
perspective is taken into account across
Government and direct access to decision makers.

g

Northern Ireland’s priorities promoted in Europe.

g

g

Support to strengthen the political process in
Northern Ireland.
Westminster support for continued constitutional
stability in Northern Ireland.

7

Defence
and Veterans

We believe that the most important duty of a
government is to protect its citizens and the nation.
A strong defence policy and well-resourced and
properly equipped Armed Forces are essential to
ensure the safety of our country.
The DUP is proud of the contribution that our Armed
Forces make to the security of our nation and the
world and recognises that Northern Ireland punches
well above its weight when it comes to the brave
men and women who serve in the Armed Forces.
The Armed Forces serve us with distinction in
conflict zones across the world, providing both
military and humanitarian support. We recall the
sacrifice of those who have fallen in the service of
our country and pledge to ensure that they and their
loved ones are not forgotten.
The massive shifts in international relations, forms of
warfare and rapid development and spread of new
threats in the world require an adaptable and flexible
strategy. It remains our view that in order to defend
our national interests and our people, we need to
keep our Armed Forces strong.

In the next Parliament, the DUP believes that there
are four key issues that must be addressed:
Defence Spending
The DUP believes that UK Defence spending should
not fall below 2% of GDP.
Defence Review
The next Strategic Defence and Security Review
must ensure that our Armed Forces are capable of
tackling multiple deployments, including as part of a
multi-national force or on our own.
Defence Policy
The United Kingdom must retain its own strong,
independent defence policy with sufficient
resources dedicated to each of the Services and
the retention of an independent nuclear deterrent.
The appropriate institution for international military
co-operation is the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation not the European Union.
Military Covenant
The Military Covenant should be implemented fully
and in an equivalent manner in all parts of the UK.
There should be a national entitlement for present
and former members of the Armed Forces.
In addition, we believe that the National Armed
Forces Day celebrations should rotate around all
the constituent parts of the UK.

14

15

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 16

8

European
Union

The DUP believes that the people of the United
Kingdom should have a say on future UK
membership of the European Union. At Westminster
our MPs have been at the forefront of the campaign
for a referendum on the European Union.
We support the current UK Government pledge to
renegotiate elements of our relationship with the
European Union.

16

9

Immigration
and
integration

The UK needs to build a national consensus on the
issue of immigration. This must reflect the value of
immigrants to the UK and also their impact on
indigenous communities. By limiting the number
and nature of those who can come from abroad we
can help reduce tensions which have damaged
community relations in recent times. As part of this
consensus there should be:
g

Stronger border controls.

g

A recognition of the contribution of immigrants.

g

Support for local communities to help integrate
those from abroad.

g

A requirement that people must contribute to
our country before they can access benefits
and services.

g

A joined up immigration and Integration service.

10

Foreign
Affairs

Maintaining a diplomatic presence across
the world
The UK’s influence on the world stage and ability to
be an effective player is dependent on a strong
global presence and a Foreign and Commonwealth
Office with first class people and skills. The next
government must ensure that such work is properly
funded, especially during a time of such global
uncertainty.

Supporting Persecuted Minorities
In the last Parliament, the DUP urged the government
to take seriously international human rights abuses
against Christians and other faith groups. We continue
to be concerned about the persecution of religious
minorities. We will continue to use our influence to
ensure that this issue is taken seriously and that the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office actively engage
with the leadership of the countries in which these
human rights violations occur.

Defending British Sovereignty
The DUP supports the people of the Falklands and
Gibraltar. Their expressed desire to remain linked to
the United Kingdom is admirable and must be
respected and if necessary defended.

17

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 18

11

Law and
Order

National Crime Agency
The National Crime Agency (NCA) is an essential tool
in tackling serious organised crime in the United
Kingdom whether it is drug dealing, racketeering,
smuggling or the activity of child pornography and
exploitation. Northern Ireland is cursed with
widespread fuel laundering which denies the
Exchequer much needed revenue and causes
significant environmental damage.
Now that our law enforcement agencies have this
essential resource it must be put to full use.

New Psychoactive Substances
The DUP has been active in seeking a UK-wide ban
on new psychoactive substances (frequently referred
to as ‘legal highs’). We will encourage the new
Government to introduce, as one of the first pieces
of legislation, a Bill to tackle the scourge of new
psychoactive substances.
The subject matter of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 is
a reserved matter, and through a new Bill the DUP
wishes to:
g

g

Create a new UK-wide offence to deal with
so-called ‘head shops’ by prohibiting distribution
of these substances for human consumption.
Classify synthetic cannabinoids based on their
effects on the brain rather than their chemical
composition.

These were two of the key recommendations from
the Home Office Expert Panel Review instigated
following correspondence from the DUP Health
Minister in Northern Ireland back in 2013. The DUP
supports the ongoing close engagement between
DHSSPS in Northern Ireland and the Home Office
on this matter.
18

Terrorism
Parliament remains responsible for anti-terrorism
legislation. Locally, nationally and internationally
terrorism continues to be a significant problem. In
Northern Ireland, the dissident republican threat,
despite the many successes of the police and
intelligence services, still causes disruption and a real
risk to our community. There is a growing threat
from extremist groups many with international
connections. These groups continue to evolve.

A review of the present terrorism legislation
The DUP believes that considering the multi-faceted
evolving and insidious nature of the terrorist threat it
would be appropriate to review whether present
arrangements need to be updated or upgraded.
This review should include:
g

Implementation of the Intelligence and Security
Committee recommendations for a new single
act to govern communications monitoring by
intelligence agencies.

g

A UK wide definition of a victim which excludes
perpetrators.

g

Changes to the glorification of terrorism offences
with an examination of the 20 year time limit.

g

Consideration of whether representation on the
Intelligence and Security Committee should
include representation from the regions of the UK.

The
Northern
Ireland
Plan

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 20

Our priorities

1
2
3
4
5

Make Northern Ireland
an economic
powerhouse
Deliver world class
public services for
our people

We have a positive plan for Northern Ireland

To deliver our plan we need a strong
team of DUP MPs returned to
Westminster to negotiate a good deal
for Northern Ireland in the event of a
hung parliament.
Only a vote for the DUP will deliver our
clear plan for a better Northern Ireland
and a stronger United Kingdom.

Create a society based
on fairness and
opportunity for everyone

We want to create a shared and united
Northern Ireland that is economically
prosperous and plays a full and active
role as part of the United Kingdom.

Make politics and
Government work better
in Northern Ireland

We will use our position at Westminster
to strengthen the UK and to seek the
best deal for Northern Ireland.

Strengthen the United Kingdom
and protect and enhance
our British identity

We will fight for the interests of
everyone in Northern Ireland.

Since devolution was restored to Northern Ireland in 2007
real progress has been made across a range of areas.
Despite all of the political ups and downs, Northern Ireland
is slowly but surely moving in the right direction again.
Over these last eight years we have been working to
secure Northern Ireland’s position within the UK, to help
grow our economy, to offer opportunity to all and to build
reconciliation and address the legacy of the past.
This challenge has been made all the more difficult by
virtue of the global economic downturn, the reduction in
public expenditure available to the Northern Ireland
Executive and the system of government we operate.
In spite of this, things are changing for the better. The
transformation is visible wherever you look. Northern
Ireland is now a venue not just for international investment,
but for events that would not have considered coming
here just a few years ago.
We have a plan for where we want Northern Ireland to be
in 2021, the hundredth anniversary of Northern Ireland’s
creation. We have been working to deliver it.
However, the election on 7 May will give Northern Ireland
the opportunity of a lifetime to transform our Province for
generations. It is highly likely that after that election no
single party will have enough seats to command a
majority in the House of Commons. That means that the
votes of our MPs could be crucial.
Political commentators have consistently stated that the
DUP could be crucial in what looks likely to be a hung
Parliament. The DUP will use such a position to negotiate
on behalf of Northern Ireland.
This document sets out some of our key priorities for
discussion with the parties which could form the next
government. It also sets out what we will do to create
the kind of Northern Ireland we all wish to see.

20

21

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 22

1
Make Northern Ireland
an economic powerhouse
WHERE WE ARE

FROM WESTMINSTER, WE WANT:

LOCALLY, WE WILL:

A century ago Ulster was an economic powerhouse within the British Isles:
today with the right investment, policies and dedication we have the potential
to create the conditions where we can be so once again. To do so we need
help from Westminster and we need to take bold steps at home as well. The
influence that we may have after this election gives us the once in a lifetime
opportunity to transform our economic fortunes for generations to come.

g More satisfactory terms in relation to

g

Corporation Tax;
g The national debt and deficit addressed in a

way which secures economic growth and
long-term prosperity while protecting essential
public services;
g UK wide tax policy improvements to encourage

economic growth in Northern Ireland;
In doing so we are building on firm foundations that
have been laid over the last few years. In 2007 we
made growing our economy the Executive’s
number one priority. The restoration of devolution
to Northern Ireland has created the peace and
political stability to encourage foreign direct
investment at record levels. In fact despite the
worldwide economic downturn more jobs have
been created in Northern Ireland over the last four
years than at any time in recorded history. Global
businesses establishing in Northern Ireland are now
the norm rather than the exception.
Our claimant count has been falling for over 25
months and our headline rate of unemployment is
broadly in line with the UK average. For the first
time in many years Northern Ireland is emerging
from an economic downturn alongside, rather than
after the rest of the UK.
After years of campaigning we managed to
persuade the UK Government to allow the
Assembly to set a Northern Ireland Corporation Tax
Rate and previously had secured the devolution of
Air Passenger Duty for long-haul flights.

We have attracted international events to Northern
Ireland from the Giro d’Italia to the Irish Open Golf
and from the European MTV Awards to the World
Police and Fire Games. We have invested in our
tourism infrastructure with signature projects such
as Titanic Belfast and the Giant’s Causeway Visitor
Centre and of course Northern Ireland is now
known worldwide as the home of the hit HBO
television series, ‘Game of Thrones’.
With the right support we can build upon the
important work that has been done in recent years to
make sure that Northern Ireland once again plays its
part as an economic driver within the United Kingdom.

g Assistance from the UK Government to attract

FDI into Northern Ireland;

g Set a low rate of Corporation Tax in Northern

Ireland for the long-term from 2017;
g

Freeze the non-domestic Regional Rate in real
terms to help local businesses;

g

Promote 25,000 new jobs by 2020;

g

Balance our budget each and every year;

g

Continue to make growing our economy the
number one priority;

g

Create the environment in Northern Ireland
where local business can prosper;

g

Provide a well educated and skilled workforce;

g

Take the decisions to make sure our people can
take advantage of new economic opportunities;

g

Remove the barriers to economic growth;

g

Reform our planning system;

g

Build more economic and transport
infrastructure for the future;

g

Continue to invest in our tourism infrastructure;

g

Bring international events to Northern Ireland;

g

Put Northern Ireland on the map internationally
and attract visitors from abroad.

g Northern Ireland businesses to be in a position to

get a fair share of national government contracts;
g Increased infrastructure investment to assist us in

preparing Northern Ireland for the future;
g Enhanced connectivity to Great Britain including

guaranteeing direct access from Northern Ireland
to London’s hub airports;
g Help from the UK Government to market

Northern Ireland internationally through its
agencies and Embassies across the world;

Make Northern Ireland the most attractive region
in the whole of western Europe to invest in;

g The UK Government to encourage international

events to Northern Ireland;
g Northern Ireland prominently incorporated into

UK branding;
g Ensure that Northern Ireland maintains its 100%

regional aid status;
g Support to help reduce electricity costs for

business customers;
g Innovate UK to establish a Northern Ireland

presence;
g Ensure that schemes developed by the

British Business Bank are tailored to suit
Northern Ireland.
22

23

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 24

2
Deliver world class
public services
for our people
WHERE WE ARE

FROM WESTMINSTER, WE WANT:

LOCALLY, WE WILL:

One of the most important duties of any government is to deliver high quality
public services. This task is challenging given the increasing expectations and
increased demand and the reduction in public expenditure available to
Northern Ireland. However, despite the difficulties we have sought to meet
the needs of our people by prioritising our key public services, saving money
by cutting waste and by reforming the services that we deliver.

g

g

Prioritise spending on health, education and
growing the economy;

g

Set ambitious targets to cut wasteful spending;

g

Reform the delivery of public services to ensure
that they meet the needs and expectations of
the public;

g

Advance an ambitious e-government agenda,
seeking to deliver an increasing number of
public services via digital and online channels,
making services more accessible to citizens;

g

Implement new and innovative sources of
financing for infrastructure projects and the
third sector;

g

Expand the scope and scale of Northern Ireland's
government shared services system;

g

Develop a comprehensive Civil Service Reform
Plan with the aim of achieving a public sector fit
for the challenges of the 21st Century;

g

Continue to construct a public sector reform
architecture that enables the Northern Ireland
Executive to adopt innovative solutions to
public service challenges.

With the reduction in public expenditure over recent
years we have had to prioritise what we need most
and focus on what matters most to our people.
In spite of the £1.5 billion reduction, in real terms, in
the funding we receive in Northern Ireland, over the
last eight years we have made health and
education our top two priorities in terms of public
expenditure. As a result we have increases in
spending on health by 33% and education by 23%
since 2007. That has allowed us to make sure we
spend the money available to us on the areas that
matter most to the general public.
As part of this process we have set ambitious
targets in terms of achieving savings across
government departments. As a result in the last
two Assembly terms savings of over £4 billion have
been achieved to free up money from important
front-line services. Those savings have been critical
to ensuring we continue to deliver the best quality
public services.

The Northern Ireland Executive has also undertaken
a significant programme of public sector reform
with major changes in education administration, the
health service and in local government. These
decisions will allow more resources to be targeted
on front line services and less on administration in
future years.
We have played our part in making the best use of
the resources that are available to us but it is
always the dedication and commitment of those
who work in the public sector that ensures world
class public services can be delivered.
The challenges of delivering world class public
services will only increase in the years to come but
with support from Westminster and the right
decisions taken at home we can not only meet but
exceed expectations of our people.

A budget settlement which will allow real term
increases in health and education spending over
the next five years without decimating other key
public services;

g

Capital investment to make our schools and
hospitals fit for the twenty first century;

g

Assistance to reform and transform our
public services.

Since the restoration of devolution we have also
invested more in capital spending in areas such as
schools, hospitals and roads than at any point in our
history. That has meant more new schools, hospitals
and roads and other key capital infrastructure.

24

25

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 26

3
Create a society based
on fairness and
opportunity for everyone
WHERE WE ARE

FROM WESTMINSTER, WE WANT:

LOCALLY, WE WILL:

One of our key goals has been to ensure that everyone can benefit from the
new era that Northern Ireland has now entered and no one is left behind. That
means there must be the opportunity for everyone to succeed and a fair and
level playing field for all. This approach will not only create a society based on
fairness but it will maximise the interests of Northern Ireland as a whole.

g Welfare Reform to incentivise work but also

g Give additional support to those individuals and

protect those most in need;
g The removal of the bedroom tax at a

national level;
g A national entitlement to enhanced support for

members of the Armed Forces across the
United Kingdom;
g Victims and Members of the Armed Forces,

We have been working to achieve the twin goals of
fairness and opportunity for all in recent years
through a range of measures.

To encourage opportunity for all, in education we
have also retained selection based on academic
ability and not the ability to pay.

Through the Stormont House Agreement we
sought to deliver affordable changes to the welfare
system that would protect the most vulnerable but
would also encourage people back to work. That
includes ensuring that the bedroom tax is not in
operation in Northern Ireland.

In the departments for which we have responsibility
we are doing everything within the law to ensure
that our Armed Forces, veterans and dependants
have every possible support.

In dealing with the issue of welfare reform it is vital
that we keep the proper balance between
enhancing the GB welfare system and the
protection of front-line public services.
We have sought to keep higher education open to all
by keeping student fees much lower than in England.

We have also ensured that local household taxes in
Northern Ireland are significantly lower than
anywhere else in the UK and have resisted the
introduction of Water Charges.
While we have achieved much in this area we will
need the help and support of Westminster to
deliver on some of our key outstanding objectives.

serving and retired to be given protected status,
akin to the protection for groups under Section
75 of the Northern Ireland Act;

communities that need help;
g Ensure we protect those most in genuine need

through our welfare system;
g Work to expand affordable childcare for

working families;
g Create an education system that guarantees a

fair start and opportunity for every child;
g Make Higher Education affordable for all;
g Prioritise the needs of our older people through

anti discrimination legislation;
g A UK wide definition of a victim which excludes

perpetrators;

g Protect existing benefits for older people such as

free bus passes;
g To ensure economic migrants must have

contributed to the UK before they are entitled to
claim benefits;
g Proper border controls and a tougher

immigration policy;
g A UK wide charter for animal protection.

g Help families by keeping household taxes the

lowest in the United Kingdom;
g Be tough on crime;
g Support tougher sentences for those who attack

older people and vulnerable people.

Through the Social Investment Fund we have
worked with communities to deliver programmes
tailored to meet their specific needs. Through
Delivering Social Change we have invested in
measures such as additional support for children to
deliver good GCSE results. We are working on a
revolutionary new Childcare system that could help
transform the sector. We have extended support
for older people including through the free
transport scheme.

26

27

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 28

4
Make politics and
Government work better
in Northern Ireland
WHERE WE ARE

FROM WESTMINSTER, WE WANT:

LOCALLY, WE WILL:

For the first time in generations, despite all of the challenges and difficulties,
Northern Ireland has had almost eight years of uninterrupted devolution. Given
the history of the last fifty years this is in itself a remarkable achievement.

g Support to strengthen the political process in

g Deliver strong and stable government;

During this time we have overcome many problems and have put in place
arrangements that have been robust and stable. We do not seek to do
anything which will threaten the long term stability of the political institutions
however, we must now make sure that it works better in delivering for the
people we represent.

Northern Ireland;
g Constitutional stability for Northern Ireland;
g Legislation to reform the structure of

government in Northern Ireland;
g The principle of devolution to be respected

by Westminster;
g A guaranteed seat at the Cabinet for a Secretary

of State for Northern Ireland;
g An agreed guaranteed minimum level of

In seeking to create a better system of government
we should remember the progress that we have
made. The St Andrews Agreement corrected some
of the key flaws of the Belfast Agreement but we
continue to work towards more normal politics in
Northern Ireland.
As a result of these changes important decisions
require Executive approval and we have a veto
over all big issues.
After years of debate and dispute we negotiated
appropriate arrangements which allowed Policing
and Justice powers to be passed to the Assembly
in 2010 on a basis which requires the Justice
Minister to be able to command a cross community
majority and have operated well since.

The Stormont House Agreement made provision
for a reduction in the number of MLAs which will
take effect no later than 2021. It also agreed to
create arrangements for an official opposition at
Stormont and better processes for the Executive.
We have agreed a reduction in the number of
government departments from twelve to nine and
a reordering of functions to improve the delivery of
public services. This will also mean a fundamental
change and to OFMDFM and a more strategic
focus with a new name, ‘The Executive Office.’

representation for Northern Ireland in the House
of Commons;
g Allowances removed from parties who refuse to

attend the House of Commons;
g No side deals with Republicans;
g A level playing field by banning all political

donations from outside the UK.

g Secure the improved level of peace and political

progress that has been made;
g Make politics work for the benefit of the people;
g Implement the changes to government set out

in the Stormont House Agreement;
g Work to provide for an Official Opposition

at Stormont;
g Work with other parties to agree further

improvements to government in Northern Ireland;
g Advocate an end to the present divisive community

designation arrangements in the Assembly;
g Seek to persuade others to end mandatory

coalition government in Northern Ireland;
g Campaign to cut the cost of government and

reduce its size;
g Work to maximise public confidence in the

political institutions in Northern Ireland.

For us to deliver the kind of changes and
improvements we want to see we will need the
support of Westminster to make sure that politics
operates better in Northern Ireland.

For many years we have campaigned for changes
to how devolution operates. Some of these
objectives were delivered as part of the talks
process which concluded last Christmas.

28

29

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 30

5
Strengthen the United Kingdom
and protect and enhance
our British identity
WHERE WE ARE

FROM WESTMINSTER, WE WANT:

LOCALLY, WE WILL:

Support for Northern Ireland’s constitutional position within the United
Kingdom has never been higher. The number of people who want to see
a united Ireland in either the short or the medium term is at an all time
low. The constitutional future of Northern Ireland has been settled for
generations to come.

g

A fair deal for all four parts of the United
Kingdom to strengthen the Union;

g

Play our full part in the National Parliament
at Westminster;

g

Protection in law for the official display of the
Union Flag and the symbols of our nation;

g

Play a constructive role in UK-wide
intergovernmental relations;

g

National events to celebrate the centenary of
Northern Ireland in 2021 and to commemorate
the Battle of the Somme;

g

Make sure Northern Ireland continues to
contribute to the life of the nation;

g

Sell the benefits of the United Kingdom to the
widest possible audience in Northern Ireland;

g

Display the flag and symbols of our nation
appropriately and with respect;

g

Support the roll out of national programmes in
Northern Ireland;

g

Work with other unionists to maximise our
power and influence at home and abroad;

g

Work to reduce Northern Ireland’s economic
dependence on Westminster;

g

Act responsibly and in the interest of the
country as a whole when taking decisions which
would have an impact nationally;

This has been achieved by agreeing political structures in Northern Ireland
that can command cross-community support and by ensuring everyone
can play a full part in our society and community.

g

g

While we should never be complacent about what
has been achieved, the focus must now move to
strengthen the United Kingdom as a whole and to
enhance our British identity in Northern Ireland.
Our place as a key and integral part of the United
Kingdom has been highlighted in recent years by
the decision to host the G8 at Lough Erne, the visit
of Her Majesty to Stormont in 2012 and the
enormous role our people continue to play in the
Armed Services.
Northern Ireland plays its full part alongside Scotland
and Wales in intergovernmental relations within the
United Kingdom and every aspect of our government
remains linked to Westminster. Despite the opposition
of Sinn Fein the work of the National Crime Agency is
also being extended to Northern Ireland.

30

At Westminster our MPs have been at the forefront
of the campaign for a referendum on the European
Union and in defence of our Armed Forces. They
continue to play a key and critical role in the
decisions, which affect our nation as a whole.
We have built strong and solid relationships with
both major Westminster parties to allow us to
maximise our influence whatever the outcome of
the general election.
In Northern Ireland we are working with other
unionist parties to maximise unionist representation
at Westminster and to deliver on the many areas of
policy where we can find agreement.
While there is much we can do in Northern Ireland,
some of these issues can only be delivered with the
help of Westminster.

g

National UK departments to carry out
administrative operations in Northern Ireland;
A new relationship between the regional
administrations and the National Government;
Arrangements to ensure Northern Ireland’s
perspective is taken into account across
Government and direct access to decision makers;

g

Northern Ireland’s priorities promoted in Europe;

g

A renegotiation of the UK’s role in Europe and
an early referendum on the European Union;

g

Commit to the NATO target of spending 2% of
GDP on defence;

g

No partisan political deals which would weaken
the United Kingdom;

g

Work to ensure disputes around parades and
protests are resolved;

g

Legislation for a new way forward on parading
which respects the fundamental rights of assembly.

g

At every level of government in Northern Ireland
defend our British cultural heritage;

g

Campaign to highlight the benefits of the
Union to Northern Ireland and Northern Ireland
to the Union.

31

During the course of the General Election campaign the DUP has published
a series of policy papers as well as our Northern Ireland Plan. This manifesto
should be read in conjunction with those documents.
There are a range of powers devolved to the Northern Ireland Assembly and
our last Assembly manifesto detailed our policy positions and commitments
in those devolved areas.
Our Westminster Parliamentary team will assist where appropriate in the
implementation of the proposals as set out in our Assembly Manifesto as well
as furthering the aims of party policy as detailed in our other DUP publications.
Our policy documents and publications can be found at www.mydup.com
April 2015

@duponline
Find DUP
on Facebook

CONTACT US: 91 Dundela Avenue, Belfast BT4 3BU T: 028 9047 1155

PUBLISHED AND PROMOTED BY DEMOCRATIC UNIONIST PARTY, 91 DUNDELA AVENUE, BELMONT ROAD, BELFAST, BT4 3BU • PRINTED BY JC PRINT LTD, THE MOUNT, 2 WOODSTOCK LINK, BELFAST BT6 8DD

DUP Manifesto 2015 v7:Layout 1 20/04/2015 19:19 Page 32
