Conservatives

time for common sense

time for common sense
We present here the most ambitious Conservative

It shouldn’t be necessary to make an appeal to common

programme for a generation.

sense.Yet the common sense wisdom of the mainstream

Its aim is to release the wisdom, decency and enterprise
of British citizens. We can achieve that by handing back

is under threat as never before.
Labour does not understand our country and cannot value

lives and communities.

what it cannot understand.

We will free entrepreneurs to build businesses and

This meddling and interfering Government is eroding our

to create prosperity, free those who use public services to

freedoms as well as weakening the institutions that give

choose what is best for them and free those who work in

us a sense of common purpose.

endless political interference.

At this Election Britain has a choice between a Labour Party
that trusts government instead of people and a

We want to set people free so that they have greater

Conservative Party that trusts people instead of

power over their own lives. That is what I have always

government.

believed.
But there is something else too. I value those aspects
of our national life which are bigger than individuals and
families. That is why we will nurture our towns and cities,
our countryside, our local institutions, our charities, our

raising a family

6

living safely

10

earning a living

14

staying healthy

18

growing older

22

majority, on crime, or on taxes, or the family, or on Europe,

to individuals and families the ability to shape their own

our schools and hospitals and police service from

through our lives

I trust the British people.
I trust their common sense.
It’s time for common sense.

knowing who we are
a world leader

28

a stronger society

32

town and country

36

a civilised country

40

a proud democracy

44

democracy – for they make us who we are as a nation.
Our programme is rooted in the instincts of millions of
people whose beliefs are mocked by Labour. It is rooted,
in other words, in common sense.

through our lives

raising a family

6

living safely

10

earning a living

14

staying healthy

18

growing older

22

raising a
family

Families feel more than ever that they are struggling to bring up their children in an environment that is hostile.

Common sense means strengthening the family

Conservatives will help families bringing up children. We will let families keep more of what they earn. We will support

They feel it is getting harder to make ends meet, especially when their children are very young. They feel the Government only
values childcare if someone else is paid to provide it, and that it doesn’t value marriage at all. They feel that they are paying a
fortune in tax, but they aren’t getting the education they want for their children.
They also worry that, however hard they try to bring up their children well, the dangers of being drawn into crime and drug

“ We will introduce a
new Married Couple’s
Allowance which will give

use are growing. And they fear that passing our values on from one generation to the next is harder than ever.

a tax cut wo rth £1,000

It’s time for common sense.

to many families when

marriage. We will provide choice and high standards in schools. And we will help parents who feel they aren’t getting enough

they need help most.”

help at the time they need it the most.
• Less tax for families
• Support for marriage

Cutting tax for families
• Freedom for headteachers and governors to run their own schools

The task of bringing up children is made much harder

We will cut taxes on families with children under 5 by

they need help most. If someone is not using all or

• Power for parents to change management of failing schools

when families keep less of what they earn, because the

increasing the Children’s Tax Credit by £200 a year. This

part of their personal tax allowance they will be able to

• Endowed universities and less onerous student loan repayments

Government is taking more.

means an extra £4 a week will be taken off the tax bill of

transfer it to a working spouse if they have children

most families with young children, in addition to what they

under 11 or receive Invalid Care Allowance in respect

receive in Child Benefit.

of a relative.

The arrival of children often puts a family under particular

Mothers or fathers who stop working to care for children

pressure. One parent may give up work for a while, reducing

can sometimes find it difficult to get back into paid

the couple’s income just when their expenses are greatest.

work afterwards. This is where our Family Scholarships

Labour have increased taxes on hardworking families. After
four years of Labour, a typical family was paying £670 more
tax per year than when the Government took office.
Despite all the evidence that marriage provides the best
environment for bringing up children, married couples do
not fit into Labour’s politically correct agenda. That is why

A Conservative government will support families coping

they have penalised millions of families by abolishing the

with these pressures.

Married Couple’s Tax Allowance.

We will introduce a new Married Couple’s Allowance which

Conservatives will give families a break.

will give a tax cut worth £1,000 to many families when

scheme will help. Parents who have taken time out
from their careers in order to care for their children will
be able to apply for a scholarship to help them undertake
vocational or professional training.

through our lives
6

7

raising a family
Widows and widowers find supporting children particularly

Headteachers and their staff cannot command respect in

We plan to spend what the Government has planned. But with us

Conservatives will give parents the right to call for a special

difficult. Conservatives will give extra help to all widows and

their own schools if they are treated as mere branch managers

more of the money will actually get to the schools. We will save

Ofsted inspection if they fear that their child’s school is failing.

widowers with dependent children by removing tax on the

on the receiving end of instructions from the council or from

money currently wasted on government and council bureaucracy,

If the inspectors confirm their view, the school’s management

Widowed Mother’s Allowance and the new Widowed Parent’s

Whitehall. And teachers are leaving the profession in droves

giving this money directly to schools according to the number of

will have to be changed. This is our Parent’s Guarantee.

Allowance. This will provide a valuable increase of up to

because of all the pointless paperwork.

pupils. By doing that each school would have received, on average,

£20 per week in widowed parents’ income.

That is why it’s time for common sense.

It is right to boost the incomes of families with modest earnings.

Conservatives will introduce ‘Free Schools’. We will free every

Britain has some excellent schools. Often they are next door to

We will reform the Working Families Tax Credit so it is once

school in the country from bureaucratic control and allow them

mediocre ones. Nothing is more frustrating for parents than to be

more paid as a benefit direct to the caring parent. Up to

to shape their own character.

told that they cannot send their child to the school of their choice

Good students are put off going to college because they will

because its numbers are artificially restricted in order to keep up

be burdened by loans that must be repaid even when their

To achieve their independence they need to have

numbers at a weaker school. So we will abolish the rule that stops

income is relatively low.

their own resources. We will therefore create permanent

400,000 mothers will gain from this reform.

More choice and higher standards in schools
The least parents should expect from all the taxes they pay is a
decent school for their children.
Labour promised much on education, but after four years in power
they have failed to deliver. That failure is no accident. It is because
Labour have tried to run the nation’s schools from Whitehall.
Conservatives will pursue a very different policy.
Our objective is to give parents choice, and headteachers freedom.

Heads and Governors will have complete responsibility for
running their schools. They will be able to choose how to reward
excellence amongst their teachers. And they will be able to use,
as a criterion for admission, the willingness of a pupil or parent

successful schools from expanding to take more pupils. More
parents will get their first choice of school for their children.

to subscribe to a home-school agreement which sets out the

Letting our best schools expand isn’t enough. We want to see good

responsibilities of students and their school to each other.

new schools springing up. We will allow churches and other faith

We will abolish the nonsensical rules that make it difficult for
Heads to exclude disruptive pupils - we will not allow a few
unruly pupils to damage the education of everyone else.
Instead, we will set up Progress Centres outside the schools.

These reforms will lead to schools of the sort parents want -

These Centres will make sure disruptive pupils get specialist help

schools with high standards, schools which have their own traditions,

to overcome their problems so that where possible they may

a distinct ethos and which wear their school uniform with pride.

return to mainstream schools.

8

an extra £540 per pupil in 1999/2000 to spend on its own priorities.

communities, groups of parents, charitable foundations and
companies to set up new schools. They will be entitled to per-pupil
funding in the same way as existing schools, and will be subject to
the same standards and inspections.

Freeing our universities
Our universities used to be the best in the world. Many of
them still have a formidable reputation, but they are under
threat from interference by politicians and uncertainty over

Reducing barriers for students

their funding.

Students feel particularly aggrieved because Labour broke

Conservatives want our universities to be free to

the promises they made to them at the last election.

shape their own character and specialisms, competing with

Some are deterred from taking vital jobs, in teaching or in the
health service, because of the cost of their student loans.
Under Labour, student loans must be repaid as soon as a

the world’s best for students and research funding.

endowment funds for Britain’s universities.

“ We will let families keep

graduate’s income reaches £10,000 per year. With us,

more of what they earn. We

graduates will not have to pay anything unless and until

will support marriage. We will

their income tops £20,000 per year. And we will not
introduce top-up fees.

p rovide choice and high
standards in schools”

The people who are most likely to realise that a school has
problems are not officials in a distant bureaucracy but the
parents of children at the school.

9

l iving
safely

We may have grown more prosperous as a nation, but the quality of our life is still impoverished by crime.
Decent people, who work hard and who obey the law, are outraged that criminals seem free to make their
lives a misery.

blind eye to crimes committed

Labour have talked tough on law and order but they have failed to deliver. Police numbers have fallen, and violent

by young offenders and ensure

crime is on the rise.

instead that they are put back

It’s time for common sense.
Conservatives will trust the instincts of the mainstream majority on law and order. That means more police

Common sense means having enough
police to keep our streets safe and a criminal

“It’s time to stop turning a

on the right track.”

and less bureaucracy holding them back. It also means tougher sentences for some crimes and more honest
sentencing for all crimes.

justice system that reflects our values rather
than undermines them
More police, tougher sentences
• Increase police numbers

Conservatives will increase the number of police officers
on our streets by reversing the cuts in police numbers that

• Free police from bureaucracy so that they can get on with policing

Labour have made.

• Take persistent young offenders off our streets

We will free the police to get on with policing rather than

• Criminals to serve the sentence given by the court

paperwork. Weighed down by regulations and under

• More rights for victims

So we will implement our ‘cops in shops’ initiative - getting
paperwork done in visible places on the beat and not
back in the station. And we will encourage parish and
town councils to create an additional new role, that of the
parish constable.

heavy political attack, police morale has fallen to its lowest
point for many years. We must raise police morale. We

Under the Conservatives, the police will be encouraged
to combat loutish behaviour, graffiti, and vandalism which
destroy the quality of every day life for millions of people.

will work with police forces to cut out bureaucracy, and to

A hard core of persistent young offenders commit a

devolve work that doesn’t have to be carried out by the

disproportionate number of crimes. They offend again

police to other bodies.

and again, laughing at the law and making their

People feel safer if they see police officers around.

neighbours’ lives a misery.

through our lives
10

11

l iving safely

“Conservat ives will increase the
number of police officers on

It’s time to stop turning a blind eye to crimes committed

Conservatives will end the nonsense whereby criminals know

introduce new laws to protect children from paedophiles

by young offenders and ensure instead that they are put back

full well they will serve only a fraction of the prison sentence

who use internet chat rooms.

on the right track.

handed down by a judge.

We will increase tenfold the number of places in Secure

We will introduce honesty in sentencing so that the sentence

Training Centres - taking persistent young menaces off our

handed down in court is the one served by the criminal. We

streets for at least 6 months. We will link their release date

will abolish Labour’s special early release scheme as well as

to the attainment of objectives such as a recognised

automatic early release and ensure that any discounts from

qualification or standard of behaviour.

the sentence are transparent, have to be earned and are

Drugs are now blighting even our rural communities,

neither automatic nor substantial.

ruining lives and causing a wave of other crimes like

Prison life should not be a life of idleness. Under the

burglary and mugging. Conservatives will give the police new

Conservatives, prisoners will be required to perform a proper

powers to crack down on drug dealers.

day’s work. The proceeds will contribute to reparations for

Most evil of all are the drug dealers who try to lure children
into addiction. We will give a mandatory prison sentence to
dealers convicted of selling drugs to under-16s. And, in

their victims and to the upkeep of their own families. And
prisoners will learn the habit of working, just as everyone else
has to do each day.

sentencing drug-pushers, judges will be allowed to take into

Sex offenders who have been released can now only be

account, as an aggravating factor, any dealing done in the

supervised for a maximum of 10 years. Courts should be able

vicinity of schools.

to place sex offenders under supervision for life. We will also

12

our streets.”

Victims first
Too often criminals seem to enjoy more rights than their
victims. Conservatives will make sure that the justice system
treats victims fairly.
A named police officer who is working on their case will
be identified to each victim, and they will have a similar
continuous point of contact in the Crown Prosecution
Service. Both the police and the CPS will be required to
keep the victim informed as the investigation and prosecution
progress and written reasons must be given where

Average sentences, and average time served on
Labour’s special early release scheme1999-2001:
Ro bbery :

charges are dropped or reduced.

average sentence:

2 years 2 months

average time served:

11 months

A Chief Inspector of Police

We will also overhaul the law so that it is on the side of
the victim not the criminal. This will include the law on self

“We could all make a list of the additional paperwork that creates a
bureaucratic nightmare for officers who want to spend more time actually
delivering the goods... The situation is far more frustrating nowadays
than at any time in my 28 years’ service.The public is getting a raw deal”

Inflicting Grievous Bodily Harm :

defence and the double jeopardy rule.

Assault on a police officer:

average sentence:

1 year 7 months

average time served:

8 months

average sentence:

5 months

average time served:

6 weeks

Since 1997-98 violent crime has risen by 15 per cent.

13

earning
a living

It is getting harder for people and businesses in Britain to earn a living.
It should be getting easier. The tough decisions and hard choices made by the British people and Conservative
Governments in the 1980s and 1990s transformed our economic prospects, and made Britain’s businesses competitive.
But instead of advancing further we are slipping back. People who have to watch every penny, see more and more of
their money taken by the Government. Businesses are spending too much time dealing with new regulations, with too
little time to focus on their customers.
It would be disastrous to re-elect a Government whose central economic policy is to increase tax and regulation by stealth.

Common sense means less tax and
regulation for people and businesses

It’s time for common sense.
We will cut taxes on people and businesses and cut government interference and regulation in order to match
the competition in the global marketplace.

• Lower taxes for businesses, families, savers, pensioners and motorists

Lower taxes
• Public spending not to outstrip the growth of the economy
All over the world, governments of all political persuasions

We will be a tax-cutting government.

• No more stealth taxes - transparent economic policy

are cutting taxes on people and businesses.

Each year, as the economy grows, we can spend more

• Cut the cost of regulation on business every year

Yet Britain is going in the opposite direction. Labour promised

on vital public services, but also allow people to keep more

• Keep the pound

not to raise taxes. They have broken that promise. Experts

of their own money. We will improve the performance of

have catalogued forty-five separate tax increases since 1997.

government and make policy changes so that after two years

Labour have said that, if they were re-elected, they would
increase spending each year faster than the growth of our
national income. That inevitably means even higher taxes.
Higher taxes come naturally to Labour, because they don’t
trust people to spend their own money.

through our lives
14

Abolish taxes on savings
and dividends

£3 billion

Raise Personal Allowance for
pensioners by £2,000

£0.8 billion

Increase Children’s Tax Credit by
£200 a year for families with children
under the age of 5

£0.3 billion

Abolish tax on Widowed Mother’s
Allowance and Widowed
Parent’s Allowance

£0.1 billion

Introduce a new Married
Couple’s Allowance

£1 billion

Cut petrol tax by 6p per litre

£2.2 billion

Tax relief on Appproved Share Options

£0.1 billion

Regeneration Tax Breaks

£0.2 billion

Business Rates reductions

£0.2 billion

Abolish IR35

£0.1 billion

we will be able to save £8 billion a year compared to Labour’s
plans. These changes do not affect schools, the NHS,
police or defence.
We will return this £8 billion to people in tax cuts - set out
throughout this manifesto - targeted to help those who have
been hit hardest by Labour’s tax increases.

Conservatives do trust people to spend their own money, and

Conservat ive tax cuts

The tax burden has risen under Labour by
3 per cent of GDP from 35.2 per cent in
1996/97 to 38.2 per cent in 2000/01 - that is
the equivalent of 10p on the basic rate of
income tax.

we will therefore pursue a very different policy.

15

earning a living

“ We will cut taxes on people and
businesses and cut government
interference and regulation in order to

Conservatives understand that our circumstances change through
our lives - most of us face financial pressures when we have young
children, for example, or find ourselves living on a fixed income in
old age. So we will carefully target tax cuts to help people at times
in their lives when they need it most, when they are struggling hard
with difficult responsibilities.
This is not the end of our tax cutting ambitions. With proper control
of government spending in the second half of the next Parliament
we can cut taxes further. Among our priorities will be to raise the
Inheritance Tax threshold and to raise the threshold at which

meddling with them for their own ends.
We need simpler taxes, too. Capital Gains Tax, for example,
is exactly what a tax ought not to be - at a high rate with lots

Clearer and simpler taxes
Labour have tried to disguise their tax increases by introducing new
stealth taxes and making the tax system more complex. We want
people to be able to see how much they pay in tax, and to see it
come down. We will run the economy with discipline, and discipline
requires transparency. So we will send every taxpayer a clear
statement of how the Government raises money and then spends it.
We will create a National Accounts Commission to set standards
of transparency for the public accounts and stop politicians from

16

£8 billion of Conservat ive savings

Commission will calculate, through an independent audit, the cost of
government regulations for business. It will then set regulatory budgets

match the competition in the global

Social security - £2.5 billion

marketplace.”

for each government department alongside their financial budgets. We

We will reform welfare to reduce dependency and create a national antibenefit fraud squad with new powers.

will bring these regulatory budgets down, year after year. The burden of

Dept of Environment, Transport & The Regions - £1 billion

regulation has ratcheted up for far too long. We will reverse it.

We will abolish regional bureaucracy, cut local government red tape and
renovate council housing by transferring it to the voluntary sector.

tax revenues rise.

Small businesses will be exempt from some regulations altogether.

Dept of Trade & Industry - £0.3 billion

Conservatives will repeal the tax on IT consultants, the notorious

Britain has been ahead of the field in the information economy

IR35, which has driven away from Britain some of our most productive

because we created an environment of low taxes and light

workers. We will replace it with targeted anti-avoidance measures.

regulation. But now we are losing that advantage fast. We don’t

We will return the cost of government to the level at which we maintained it
during the last Conservative Government.

Five disciplines for a sound economy

need more regulations, we need more competition. The utility

Britain Works - £0.6 billion

The next Conservative Government will operate within a sound and stable financial framework based on five disciplines.

regulators must focus on competition and address the market

We will replace the failing New Deal with Britain Works and contract out the
job-finding work of the Employment Service.

We will keep the pound. Labour’s plan for early entry

We will appoint a National Accounts Commission to

into the euro is the single biggest threat to our

draw up proper national accounts, including a proper

economic stability. By keeping the pound we will keep

presentation of the Government’s long term liabilities.

of complicated exemptions. Capital Gains Tax should be
simplified, allowances removed and the rate cut. The experience
of the US and Ireland is that this stimulates enterprise and

people begin to pay higher rate income tax, because it currently
catches people who are not, by any definition, rich.

have the power to send them to Parliament for full debate. And the

Less regulation
Regulation is the new way Labour politicians control the economy.

dominance of incumbents which stand in the way of competition.

Businesses they wouldn’t dream of nationalising, they regulate.
We will abolish Labour’s Climate Change Levy package. The

We will slim down the DTI and improve its effectiveness for business.

Reversing the growth in government bureaucracy - £1.8 billion

Creation of a Community Legal Aid Fund - £0.3 billion

necessary carbon dioxide reduction can be achieved far more

We will reform legal aid by creating a new Community Legal Aid Fund. In
return for financing civil cases, the Fund will receive a portion of the
damages when its clients win.

efficiently by other means. We will also review the future of nuclear

Endowing Universities - £1.3 billion

We will enhance the independence of the Bank of

increases in spending which are within the trend rate

energy and its role in contributing to reductions in CO2 emissions.

England’s Monetary Policy Committee.

of growth of the economy.

and free businesses to serve their customers rather than serving

We will free universities from reliance on state funding and provide
endowments paid for by future asset sales and the reform of student loans.

their regulators.Governments are held to account for the taxpayers’

Endowing Britain’s culture - £0.2 billion

will comment publicly on whether the balance between

money they spend. We think they should be similarly held responsible

We will privatise Channel 4 and give the money to cultural institutions like
museums and galleries so they are more independent of the state.

spending and taxes represents a prudent approach to

Total - £8 billion

and low interest rates.

It has the same consequences: the judgment of politicians and
civil servants is substituted for that of owners and entrepreneurs.
So a Conservative Government will cut the burden of regulation

for the other costs they impose on businesses. All new regulations will
have to be scrutinised by a new Deregulation Commission, which will

control of our economic policy, including the ability to
set interest rates to suit British economic conditions.

We will plot a course away from the direction in which
the Chancellor is leading us, and towards real annual

We will set up a Council of Economic Advisers, which

the national finances, and is helping secure low inflation

17

staying
healthy

The National Health Service is in a state of almost permanent crisis.
Too many of us experience a second-class system. People are waiting too long to be treated; they are suffering shabby and
unhygenic conditions in hospitals; they have no choice in how, when or where they are looked after. As people become used to
choice and quality in other areas of their life, the service they get from the NHS is increasingly unacceptable.

in medical judgments and giving choice to patients

party is committed to
a comprehensive NHS

It’s not just about money.
Ask anyone who works in the health service and they will tell you that the NHS is now creaking under the strain of bureaucracy
and Government gimmicks. All the Government has done in four years is to substitute its own political priorities and the pursuit of

Common sense means ending political interference

“ The Conservat ive

headlines for the clinical judgment of doctors and nurses. Labour said they would cut waiting lists - so hospitals have been forced

f ree to all its users.”

to bring in waiting lists to get on the waiting list, and to give priority to non-urgent operations over those in genuine medical need.
It’s time for common sense. The next Conservative Government will match the Government’s plans for spending on the NHS but
ensure the money goes further.
We will take politicians out of the day-to-day management of the NHS, putting in their place respect for clinical decisions and

• Increase funding for NHS

accountability to patients.

• Trust doctors and nurses, not politicians, to make medical decisions

We will also build a new partnership between the state and independent sectors.

• Give patients and GPs the right to choose in which hospital to be treated
• Remove tax penalty on private medical insurance
• Guaranteed limits on waiting times for patients

The Patient’s Guarantee
The NHS cannot succeed if those who work within it

Yet, immediately on taking office, Labour introduced

are not allowed to succeed. Our National Health Service

their Waiting List Initiative which replaced clinical judgment

used to be an example to the world. We still have first

with bogus political priorities.

class doctors and nurses, and many of our hospitals

Immediately on our taking office we will abolish the

have international reputations for excellence. The

Waiting List initiative. We will introduce a Patient’s

clinical judgment of professionals in the NHS is still

Guarantee instead.

among the best anywhere.

through our lives
18

19

staying healthy
The Patient’s Guarantee will give patients a maximum waiting

We will allow alternative and complementary therapies to be

The Conservative Party is committed to a comprehensive

It doesn’t take a doctor to take a patient’s blood pressure.

Sisters, so that they can make sure that their patients get

made available through the NHS, provided they are of proven

NHS free to all its users. There is no question of anyone

We will encourage an expansion in the role of practice

the care they demand. And we want to bring back Matron

clinical effectiveness.

being forced to take out private insurance. But if people do

nurses to take on some of the tasks carried out by GPs,

choose to insure themselves privately they should not be

allowing them more time to see more patients.

We will require hospitals to give back authority to Ward

time in defined clinical areas, starting with cardiac and
cancer services, based on their medical need as assessed
by the patient’s own consultant. The health authority will be

so that someone is responsible for overseeing and

obliged either to treat the patient within that maximum waiting

supporting the nursing staff.

time, or to arrange for the patient to have the choice of being
treated in another health authority or in a private hospital.
We will stop politicians interfering in clinical decisions
and in the running of hospitals.

Choice for GPs and patients

NHS is to give patients choice.

GPs the choice of whether to operate as Primary Care Trusts if

and to regulate standards of quality, not to micro-manage

patients to the hospital of their choice.

interfere in its workings, so that people who work in the NHS
are chosen because of their expertise, not their politics.
The quality of the care people receive in hospital is determined
as much by standards on the ward as by their surgical
procedures. Yet while Ward Sisters are held responsible for
the well-being of their patients, they do not have authority over
many of the activities, such as feeding and cleaning, that
determine the quality of the care they provide.

20

GPs have told us that they don’t want a new upheaval in
primary care: we will follow their advice. Instead, we will give

When Labour were elected they limited GPs’ freedom to refer

appointments body, and ensure that ministers cannot

themselves to deliver the best care to their patients.

One of the best ways of improving the performance of the

The role of the Secretary of State will be to agree funding,

hospitals. We will create a properly independent

We will give doctors the right to decide how they organise

We will give back to patients and their doctors the power to choose.

they think that is right for themselves and their patients. And
we will encourage GPs to specialise, so that GP teams will be
increasingly able to offer expert diagnosis and treatment to their
patients. That way, many patients will get expert opinions and

Patients will be able to be treated in the hospital which they

care by doctors they know, without the need to go to hospital.

and their GPs choose, and will have full access to information

Choice for patients extends to private healthcare.

on hospitals’ waiting lists and success rates to enable them to

Because of the problems in the health service many people

make that choice.

with modest incomes spend their hard-earned savings on

Hospitals will be rewarded for the operations they carry out, so

paying privately for operations or for medical insurance for

that good hospitals can attract more patients and more funding,

themselves and their families. In doing so, they free resources

and patients will be able to choose to be treated in hospitals with

in the NHS and help reduce waiting times, but often at

world-class expertise in their illness.

considerable personal cost.

penalised for making this choice.

Some health authorities allow doctors to prescribe

Labour imposes a tax penalty on employers who offer their

certain new drugs, and some do not. Conservatives

employees private medical insurance, and then taxes again

will end this lottery whereby the postcode you live in

any employee who has this benefit. It doesn’t make sense

determines the treatment you receive by introducing an

and, when affordable, we will abolish both taxes.

Exceptional Medicines Fund. Expensive new medicines -

More patients treated, more quickly

such as Beta Interferon for multiple sclerosis - will be
funded direct to doctors from a budget set by the Secretary

Conservatives will unblock the bottlenecks that slow down

of State. Access to the funding will be decided by criteria laid

treatment in the NHS.

down by a panel of senior clinicians and academics.

We will, for example, encourage the development of

Conservatives will ensure that important issues of medical

stand-alone surgical units specialising in a particular type

ethics are properly debated in Parliament.

of standard operation, such as cataract surgery or hip
replacements. These units would be funded by the NHS
and be free of charge for patients, but could be operated
by either NHS or private providers. They would enable us
to make rapid reductions in the waiting times required for
these procedures.

“ We will stop politicians fro m
interfering in clinical
decisions and in the running
o f hospitals.”
We will ensure hospices are properly
funded by increasing the state’s contribution
from 32% to 40% for adult hospices and
from 4% to 40% for children’s hospices.

21

growing
older
Common sense means respect and
independence for older people

Older people are among our most responsible citizens and give a great deal to their communities, but they have been
demeaned and patronised by this Government. They resent being seen as a burden. And they fear they do not have a
place in Blair’s Cool Britannia.
To be able to have the standard of living to which they are entitled, Britain’s pensioners now have to apply to the State
for special favours. When Labour came into office, 37 per cent of pensioners had to take the means test in order to get
their benefit entitlement. On Labour’s current plans, within two years most pensioners - 57 per cent - will have to apply
to the State for help in this undignified and intrusive way.
Pensioners are proud of being able to take responsibility for themselves, but Labour has denied them this dignity.
Instead they have taxed pensioners more heavily and driven them on to means-tested benefits.

“ We will abolish the
rule which currently
fo rces pensioners to
buy an annuity when
they reach 75.”

It’s time for common sense.
Conservatives will give pensioners greater independence from the State, by cutting taxes, removing a million pensioners

• Cut taxes for pensioners

from income tax altogether, and by increasing the basic state pension - with no strings attached.

• Increase the basic state pension
• Abolish compulsory annuities at age 75
• Allow younger workers to opt for properly funded private pensions
• Protect the savings and homes of those needing long term care

Freeing pensioners from tax
It is wrong that pensioners with modest incomes find

A Conservative Government will also raise the special

themselves paying income tax. It is particularly unfair that

age tax allowance for pensioners by £2,000, from

pensioners who have saved for their retirement - from

around £6,000 to over £8,000 per year. This will take

their salaries on which they have already paid tax - are

one million pensioners out of income tax altogether

then taxed again on the interest their savings earn. We

and many other pensioners will pay £8.50 less tax per

will abolish taxes on savings for most savers - which will

week.

be of particular benefit to pensioners.

through our lives
22

23

growing older
Long term care

A higher pension
Conservatives want to provide support to pensioners when they

This option will be available to all pensioners who get their

The best way to achieve higher pensions in the future

We also want to tackle another problem which

need it most. This should not entail more and more pensioners

pension uprated, including groups that Labour forgot - the

is by more genuine funding of pensions. We wish to

preys on the minds of many people as they

facing the indignity and bureaucracy of means tests.

200,000 in nursing homes and residential accommodation

enable young people to build up a funded alternative to

become older - meeting the costs of long-term

who do not receive the winter fuel payment and 360,000

the basic pension for the future. No-one would be forced

care. Our proposed funding of the NHS matches

pensioners living abroad.

to change. The basic state pension would continue to

Labour’s plans and includes a commitment that all

be paid as now, not merely to current pensioners but

nursing care will be free at the point of use. But

to people of working age and new entrants who want

we need to go further to get at the source of the

it in the future. We will consult on how best to offer

problem.

So we will offer pensioners a substantial increase in the
basic state pension.
At our first opportunity to uprate pensions, in April 2002, we

Funded pensions

will match the Government’s plans for an increase of £3 a

The best way to make sure that people have decent

week for a single pensioner under 75 and £4.80 for a

incomes in their retirement is for them to invest during

married couple under 75.

their lives in assets that will grow. But the state takes

But we will go further in helping older pensioners, who tend

people’s national insurance contributions and then fails to

to be poorer. Over-75s will have a bigger uprating of £4 for

invest them, leaving pensioners with miserly pensions.

a single pensioner and £6.80 for a married couple. We will

We need to make it easier for people to provide for a

be helping poorer pensioners without more means-testing.

prosperous retirement.

Pensioners can carry on receiving the free TV licence, the

But Labour have hit private and occupational pensions

Winter Fuel Payment, and the Christmas bonus exactly as

with higher taxes. And many of the current generation

at present. But, if they prefer it, we will give every pensioner

of working people have expectations of the pension they

the choice to opt for a higher basic pension, which consolidates

are likely to receive which are unfortunately way ahead

these individual payments, tax-free.

of the likely reality.

24

this new option of funded pensions for young people.

We will consider how people who have made

We will also abolish the rule which currently forces

prudent provision in advance for the cost of long

pensioners to buy an annuity when they reach 75.

term care can be protected from having their

People with personal pensions will only need to

assets taken by the state if their actual care costs

ensure that they have sufficient income to keep

are more than could reasonably be foreseen.

“ We will abolish
taxes on savings
for most savers which will be of
particular benefit
to pensioners ”

Your pension with the Conservatives

Basic state pension
2001/02

Basic state pension
2002/03
(Conservative plans)

Value of pension
with optional consolidated
special payments

free of means-tested benefits.

Single pensioner

£72.50

£75.50

£78.60

The remaining capital in the pension fund will be theirs

Married pensioner couple

£115.90

£120.70

£124.00

Single pensioner over 75

£72.50

£76.50

£81.75

Married couple over 75

£115.90

£122.70

£128.20

to keep and - if they wish - to pass on to their children.

25

knowing who we are

a world leader

28

a stronger society

32

town and country

36

a civilised country

40

a proud democracy

44

a world
leader
Common sense means valuing what makes us
distinctive as a nation

• A more flexible European Union

Britain is one of the world’s most respected democracies, one of its most influential leaders, one of its most
prosperous nations and one of its greatest military powers.
Our possession of all of these qualities, which we rightly value, depends upon our ability to govern ourselves. And all of
them are put at risk by the threat that is now posed to our independence.
Labour have lost confidence in our ability to govern ourselves.
It’s time for common sense.
The next Conservative Government will secure our independence and use Britain’s great strengths to help create
a flexible Europe of nations, to maintain the Atlantic Alliance and to develop the role of the Commonwealth.

In Europe, not run by Europe
The guiding principle of Conservative policy towards the

• Veto further transfers of power from Westminster to Brussels

European Union is to be in Europe, but not run by Europe.

• No European army outside NATO

We will lead a debate in Europe about its future, promoting our

• Global free trade by 2020

own clear and positive vision.
The European Union has, with the prospect of enlargement,

• A safe haven, not a soft touch, on asylum

reached a fork in the road. Down one route lies a fully
integrated superstate with nation states and the national veto
disappearing. The Government is taking us down this route.

trading and competitive EU, countries need only participate in
new legislative actions at a European level if they see this as in
their national interest.
At the same time, we are willing to support the principle of
‘reinforced co-operation’ in Europe, under which small groups of
countries can become more closely integrated if they wish to do
so, providing it does not damage Britain’s national interest.

pound. We will maintain our
national veto on European
legislation.”

maintain our national veto on European legislation. Giving up
either would put our ability to govern ourselves at risk. We will not
ratify the Nice Treaty but will renegotiate it so that Britain does not

different combinations for different purposes and to differing

lose its veto.

debate, we can make this alternative a reality.

Government will keep the

The next Conservative Government will keep the pound. We will

The alternative is a Europe of nations coming together in

extents. In other words, a network Europe. If Britain leads the

“ The next Conservat ive

We also propose to amend our domestic law to include
“reserved powers”. This will prevent EU law from overriding the

We will insist on a Treaty ‘flexibility’ provision, so that outside the

will of Parliament in areas which Parliament never intended to

areas of the single market and core elements of an open, free-

transfer to the EU.

“We want early enlargement of the
European Union - the first wave, including
Cyprus, should be admitted by 2004.”

knowing who we are
28

29

a world leader
This policy will be reinforced with a determination to veto further

have also come under attack from those more interested in political

We will also end this Government’s equivocation over the

Multilateral aid and development institutions are crying out for

The Commonwealth has huge potential - as a force for

This Government has allowed a crisis to develop which has

transfers of power from Westminster to Brussels. Should any future

correctness than operational effectiveness. At the same time, our

development by the US of ballistic missile defences. We believe

reform. In particular, we are calling for the EU to set its house in

stability, for promoting the rule of law, democracy and the

encouraged an illegal trade in human misery, blighting many lives.

Government wish to surrender any more of Parliament’s rights and

primary alliance, NATO, is being weakened by a concerted drive to

our close ally deserves our support in countering new threats

order. Unless the Commission reforms its management, we will

open economy, and potentially as a means of focusing UK

power to Brussels they should be required to secure approval for

create an independent military structure in the EU. And for the first

from rogue states and terrorists equipped with weapons of

propose a treaty amendment allowing member states to deliver

aid. We will consult with our partners on implementing many

such a transfer in a referendum.

time, a British government is leading this attempt.

mass destruction. We will take a lead in building support for

aid bilaterally instead.

of the recommendations of the Commonwealth Commission.

We intend to press for the single market to be completed and for

A Conservative Government would pursue a very different policy.

We will press for more effective debt relief, action on HIV/AIDS

We will use Britain’s influence in the world for peace and

admits that thousands of those whose cases are rejected

and conflict prevention and resolution.

stability, whether in Kashmir or Cyprus or the Middle East.

simply disappear and never leave.

We will appoint an Envoy for Religious Freedom.

Britain has vast global reach. In a world where geography

In four years, Labour has seen the cost of the asylum system

matters less, Britain is not on the periphery of anything.

double and put a great strain on many communities.

competition laws to be stronger so that British businesses which
play by the rules are not undercut by other companies that do not.
We will also press for Europe to tackle fraud and maladministration
as a matter of priority. If the EU reduced waste and abandoned illconsidered programmes, it could make significant reductions in the
overall size of the European budget.

A military power and a staunch ally

We think it is common sense to support institutions that work. Our
armed forces and NATO work very well.
So we will support our armed forces by setting out to match
commitments to capabilities, by making it a priority to achieve
the armed forces’ full manning levels and by opposing political

The British way of life and freedom and democracy around the
world are made more secure by the professionalism of our

The last four years have seen our armed forces come under
increased pressure. Overstretched and undermanned, they

30

Coming to the aid of others
Playing our part in world leadership means playing our part in
helping the development of other countries.

Taking a lead in the world

Uniquely, we have a central place in the EU, NATO, the

The world is changing. The old power blocs are declining

Commonwealth and the UN. A Conservative government

We will work towards the UN aid target of 0.7% of GNP.

Convention on Human Rights, just as France, Spain, Portugal

We will do what we can to encourage responsible behaviour by aid

and others have done.

recipients, by focusing on good governance, and by strengthening

Conservatives will build on Britain’s strengths, so Britain can

We will seek greater flexibility to deal with unplanned commitments

civil society, free markets, the rule of law and anti-corruption

be a force for good. Britain has prospered when trade has

and to reduce overstretch. We will reform the Territorial Army and

measures.

been free. We will lead the campagin for a trans-Atlantic free

enhance the role of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and our other

We will increase the involvement of charities and the voluntary

Reserve Forces.

sector. We will double the proportion of our aid budget spent through

Conservatives have always supported stronger European defence

aid charities, as they are often better placed than governments

co-operation, but always inside NATO. We will not participate in a

to relieve suffering. We will also establish a central information

structure outside NATO, but will insist instead that any European

service, ‘Aid Direct’, that will build strong direct links between

armed forces and the success of our long term military alliances.
Yet now all this is under threat.

We remain fully committed to Britain’s independent nuclear deterrent.

correctness. We will exempt the armed forces from the European

One of the reasons that Britain is respected around the world
is that it remains a first-class military power.

ballistic missile defence against threats to Europe and America.

initiative is under the NATO umbrella.

aid donors and recipients.

in importance. Nations, and networks between nations, are
taking centre stage.

trade area, encompassing the EU and NAFTA. This is a step
towards our vision of global free trade by 2020. Britain has an
unrivalled diplomatic service. We will strengthen it further by

will be outward-looking, using our influence to the full.

A safe haven, not a soft touch, on asylum

The problem here is worse than anywhere else in Europe
because of Labour’s mismanagement. The Government has
presided over massive delays in processing applications and

Our policy will be that all new asylum applicants are housed
in secure reception centres until their cases are determined.
This will speed up the process of establishing which claims
are well-founded. Asylum applications from safe countries
will not normally be accepted.

Over the centuries Britain has welcomed people who have been
persecuted by oppressive regimes overseas.

We will ensure that those whose claims are rejected are
quickly deported by a new Removals Agency.

But now our ability to be a safe haven for the genuinely oppressed
is severely hampered by the virtual collapse of our asylum
system. This chaos encourages unfounded asylum claims.

creating a new Foreign, Commonwealth and Trade Office to

Britain has gained a reputation as a soft touch for bogus

bring diplomacy and free trade together, giving renewed impetus

asylum seekers.

Conservatives will restore common sense to Britain’s
asylum procedures.

to trade and commerce.

31

a stronger
society
Common sense means responsible citizens
and a smaller state

A strong society rests on responsible individuals and families. They need to be able to turn to straightforward, reliable
help when times are bad. But that should not become dependence on the state when times are good.
Labour promised to reform the welfare state, but they shirked the challenge.
It’s time for common sense.
The next Conservative Government will help build a stronger society. We will provide support for individuals and
families when they need it. And we will encourage people to take responsibility for themselves and their families.
Tolerance is one of Britain’s historic virtues. A strong society is built on respect for all people - whatever their race,
religion, gender or sexual orientation.

Welfare without the state
Many of our poorest people are forced to struggle with a

families, faith communities and voluntary groups a voice

mess of complicated and ill thought out government

at the heart of Government. The Office will cut through

schemes. And at the same time, the Government is

the bureaucracy that stops the good neighbours of

• Reform taxation for charities

squeezing out genuine voluntary groups, who are best

Britain from helping those in need.

• Pay independent groups to get people back to work and

able to help people in real need.

We hope to help charities by abolishing their irrecoverable

Conservative policy will be very different.

VAT liabilities. The Government refuses to be frank about

• Create an Office of Civil Society to champion families,
voluntary organisations and faith communities

find them lasting jobs
• Protect the savings of disabled people and help them find work
• Tackle welfare fraud

A Conservative Government will tackle the problems
of poverty and disadvantage with the same vigour and
inventiveness with which we tackle Britain’s economic

the money that Whitehall departments have set aside for
preparations for converting to the euro, but we believe
they are substantial. We will divert this money to fund this
major reform of taxation for charities.

problems. Central government will not try to do everything
by itself. Instead we will work with volunteers, charities
and local institutions to bring new life to our communities.
We will establish a new Office of Civil Society to give

Effective help for unemployed people
It is a cruel trick on unemployed people to place them
on training schemes which often do little or nothing to

knowing who we are
32

33

a stronger society

“Britain is made up of many ethnic
communities. Conservat ives
We will address this problem by creating a new agency which

believe that we are richer and

will pay Incapacity Benefit on the basis of current entitlements.

stronger for it.”

improve their long-term employment prospects.

Helping people into the labour market

Labour’s New Deal raised people’s hopes but has

There is evidence that it is in the best interests of children of a lone

failed to deliver. Unemployment has fallen more slowly under

parent for that parent to be working when the child is of secondary

this Government than under the last one.

school age. It increases the chances that the child will get good

The next Conservative Government will help unemployed

qualifications and go on successfully to hold down a job.

people back into work more effectively than ever before.

We will therefore expect lone parents on income support with

An effective attack on fraud

We will replace the New Deal with ‘Britain Works’. Independent

children over 11 to be actively seeking the sort of jobs which they

Instead of reforming welfare, Labour have made it even

contractors will be rewarded not just for their success in helping

can combine with their family responsibilities.

more complex. Instead of encouraging self-reliance they

the unemployed to find jobs but also for enabling them to keep

Labour have treated people with disabilities appallingly - means-

have spread dependence on means tests. Complicated means-

those jobs.

testing their benefits and eroding their supported employment. It is

tested benefits are not just demeaning, they are also wide open

This will address one of the worst failures of this Government’s

time for them to have a better deal.

to fraud and abuse. The Government itself has admitted that

employment policies - the revolving door which takes people

The Government is treating the savings of disabled people on

through a cycle of benefits, training schemes, and temporary

Income Support less generously than pensioners in the same

work, only to end up back on benefits.

circumstances. This is an indefensible and unprecedented

The best way of helping unemployed people is to get them back

discrimination against disabled people. We will tackle it head-on. We

into work as quickly as possible. That is the basis of our Can

will increase the amount of savings which a disabled person can

Work, Must Work Guarantee. Those who can work must do so

have before losing benefit, matching the entitlement of pensioners.

or they will lose their unemployment benefits.

Disabled people who have lost their jobs can become trapped

the entire UK population. Some of these numbers are

on Incapacity Benefit.

fraudulent and we will clean them up.

34

But it will also have the funds to obtain the physiotherapy or the
physical aids which can help disabled people back to work as
quickly as possible.

there could be £7 billion of fraud. In 1998/99 there were
160,000 established cases of Housing Benefit and Council
Tax benefit fraud, but just 800 successful prosecutions 99.5% of fraudsters are not successfully prosecuted. We will
introduce a tough anti-fraud package, including a single
integrated task force to tackle fraud nationwide. There are 80
million National Insurance numbers which is rather more than

35

t own and
country

Local communities are life’s essential harbours. They provide us with a strong sense of local identity. But too many are under

“ Farming and the countryside

enormous pressure. Our countryside, ignored by the Government, has been devastated by the Foot and Mouth crisis. There are

are in crisis. Foot and Mouth

too many urban and rural communities that are not sharing in our country’s prosperity and where deprivation passes from
generation to generation. There are other neighbourhoods where many young people cannot afford to live, despite having grown
up there.

disease is but the latest in a

It’s time for common sense.

series of bl ows inflicted on

Conservatives will restore to communities a sense that they can shape their neighbourhoods, influence local architecture

Common sense means valuing the

our farmers.”

and improve the quality of their surroundings. And we will take effective action to help our rural communities and businesses
recover from the effects of Foot and Mouth.

distinctiveness of both town and country
Recovering from Foot and Mouth
• Implement a Strategy for Recovery from Foot and Mouth for farms and rural
businesses
• Establish Regeneration Companies to revitalise inner cities and housing estates
• Abolish housebuilding targets which threaten our green fields
• Cut business rates for rural shops, pubs, garages and village post offices
• Cut fuel tax to help motorists

The Foot and Mouth crisis has been a disaster for our countryside.

to cut the bill for taxpayers and consumers, provide sustainable

We will improve animal protection and welfare by building on the

Farmers have seen years of hard work destroyed in weeks. Rural

long term support for farming, and protect the environment and the

successes of the last Conservative Government to raise animal

businesses have seen their turnover collapse. Animals have suffered

countryside. We will renegotiate the CAP so that many decisions

welfare standards in Europe.

welfare problems of a kind we never expected to see in Britain. The

currently taken at EU level would be taken by the governments of

tragedy is that the crisis need not have been as widespread or so

individual member states.

prolonged if the Government had acted urgently and decisively from

depends on it. Alongside the farming crisis, rural communities are

form-filling and red tape. The next Conservative Government will

losing their post offices, pubs and police stations at alarming

The priority now must to be help the countryside recover.

not enforce European regulations any sooner or more zealously

rates.

Immediately upon taking office, we will implement our Strategy for

than other countries.

the beginning.

all; help for struggling tourism and other rural business and firm
action to prevent infection entering Britain again.

Farming and the countryside
Foot and Mouth disease is but the latest in a series of blows inflicted
on our farmers.

36

but has also damaged the general rural economy and all that

Farmers and other rural businesses spend too much time on

Recovery - practical steps to stamp out Foot and Mouth once and for

knowing who we are

The Foot and Mouth crisis has not only badly damaged farming

The Common Agricultural Policy has damaged consumers,
farmers, the taxpayer and the environment. It must be reformed

We will also fight for a fair deal for consumers, by introducing
honesty in labelling and requiring the country of origin and method

Labour neither understands the needs of the countryside nor even
cares about its survival.
We need a new approach.

of production of the main ingredients to be stated on the label of
all food products.

The next Conservative government will protect the liberty and
livelihood of rural communities. Our policies on transport, crime,

We will also renegotiate the Common Fisheries Policy. We will

planning and Europe will all benefit the countryside.

insist on national or local controls being established over our own
waters, whether through zonal management, or coastal
management, or in some other way.

We will cut business rates for rural shops, pubs, garages and
village post offices and change the rules so that they can provide
new, much-needed local services. We will encourage more

37

t own and country
passenger-friendly rural transport services and give community

cities. As long as people leave the cities to occupy new houses built

problems which undermine the quality of life in these areas such as

less than £8 billion on transport. Conservatives are not anti-car, but

of service and safety. We will stop Labour’s policy of blame and

transport schemes a tax rebate on their fuel cost.

on green fields there can be no prospect of an urban revival.

litter, graffiti, and dumped cars. We will also tackle insensitive siting of

we are anti-pollution, and so we will cut taxes on cleaner fuels

shame. We will implement the Cullen Inquiry recommendations.

mobile phone masts without adequate consultation.

and cleaner vehicles.

Subject to a ‘no strike’ deal we will work with Bob Kiley - who

Post offices round the country are closing in record numbers

We must start by making our cities places where families want to live

because the Government has announced the ending of cash

and put down roots. That means tackling the problems that drive

We will streamline planning procedures to make it easier

We will set out long term investment plans for roads and public

payment of pensions and benefits at post offices. We recognise the

many familes to leave. First and foremost this means education and

for new houses to be built on brownfield sites. We will give local

transport, meeting the needs of commuters, cyclists, pedestrians,

essential part played by post offices as a focus of community life.

crime. In too many of our inner cities families with young children

councils power to declare extra areas of local Green Belt.

and elderly and disabled people. We will establish a new Roads

And we will make Britain a nation of homeowners. We will increase

Standards Unit to champion the interests of road users. It will aim

the right-to-buy discounts on council homes and introduce a new

to take through traffic out of towns and villages and minimise the

rent-to-mortgage scheme. Homesteading grants will allow people to

environmental effects of roads. It will set sensible speed limits for

first repair, and then own empty council housing.

each stretch of road, and make roads safer.

Conservatives will give housing associations more freedom to

Unlike Labour, we will not ban people from driving if they

compete in the housing market. We will encourage greater

marginally exceed the 70mph limit on motorways. Instead we will

involvement of tenants in running their estates.

look to improve the traffic flow on motorways by increasing the

We will remove Labour’s threat and instead introduce a benefit card
which will cut fraud and bring large efficiency gains while continuing
to bring business into post offices.
We will abolish centrally-driven national or regional housebuilding
targets. Local councils accountable to local people should be
responsible for meeting local housing needs. Where there is rapid

feel they have to get out to get educated. And until there is effective
policing and the streets are safe, money spent improving houses or
encouraging enterprise will have little impact.
The next Conservative Government will establish new local
Regeneration Companies to drive the campaign to revitalise our
inner cities and outer urban estates.

population growth, central government should work in partnership

Working with local councils, businesses and people they will be able

with local councils to invest in additional infrastructure.

to buy extra policing strength, help set up Partner Schools, and tear

As well as our Green Belts, we will take action to protect our rivers,
wetlands, lakes, canals and coastline from development by
establishing "Blue Belt" areas.
The Conservatives will establish a new Select Committee on
Rural Affairs to monitor the impact on rural communities of all
aspects of government policy.

The regeneration of urban Britain
The future of the countryside is bound up with the future of our inner

38

down the worst tower blocks. They will have statutory powers to
accelerate the planning and development of rundown areas.
We will support radical solutions to the long term decline of coastal
towns - bringing in new measures to help them support and market
their heritage, protect their coastline, improve transport links, and
tackle the problems they face in housing asylum-seekers.
We will also tackle the problem of ‘neighbours from hell’. We will
enable the eviction of residents who break tenancy agreements, fail to
pay their rent and desecrate the neighbourhood. We will tackle the

speed limit to 80 mph where it is safe to do so, and enforcing this

Transport

speed limit rigorously. We will target the hard core of bad drivers

Labour promised “immediate benefits” in transport. But public

who are the main cause of accidents.

transport has become worse, while our roads are more

We will restore the competitiveness of the British haulage,

congested than ever. Britain has the highest road user taxes in

shipping, and aviation industries. We will charge foreign lorries for

Europe and the worst traffic jams. Labour want to force car

the use of British roads with our Brit Disc scheme.

drivers off the roads, without offering an alternative. They will
tax drivers who come into town centres, and tax those who
need to park at work.
Last year, Labour took £36 billion from road users but they spent

We will cut tax on petrol and diesel by 6p per litre. It is technology,
not taxation, that cuts pollution from vehicles.
We will revive the railway industry so it achieves airline standards

transformed the New York subway - and support his ambitions to
create a world class London Underground.

The wider environment
Conservatives believe that each of us should act as a steward
preserving and enhancing the natural world and the built
environment for future generations.
The biggest global environmental challenge is to prevent climate
change causing long-term damage through extreme weather

Foot and Mouth:
A Strategy for Recovery
Conservatives have played a constructive role
throughout the Foot and Mouth crisis. We have
put forward practical policies to speed up the
eradication of the disease, give real help to
businesses hit by the crisis and to ease the
suffering of animals.

conditions. We will meet the commitments made by successive
British governments by a comprehensive package of emission
permit trading, energy conservation measures, tax incentives,
greater encouragement of renewable energy and cleaner
energy generation.

Immediately upon taking office we will
implement a Strategy for Recovery including
action to:
• speed up disposal of slaughtered animals
• unblock delays in compensation for affected
farms
• offer interest-free loans for affected
businesses
• properly fund campaigns to promote the
tourist industry
• block high risk food imports to prevent Foot
and Mouth recurring

39

a civilised
country

Government policy towards the arts, sports and broadcasting has stumbled from fiasco to disaster in the last four years.
The Government wasted millions of pounds on bailing out the Dome, botched the development of Wembley stadium,
dithered over the new UK Sports Institute, and supervised a bizarre competition to run the National Lottery only to end
up handing it back to the existing firm.
This incompetence has been accompanied by a disdain for British traditions and a modish contempt for our heritage.
Labour even promoted a bogus new culture - ‘Cool Britannia’ - in an attempt to supplant the culture and identity which
has shaped us.

Common sense means supporting the people that

It’s time for common sense.

create a thriving culture

A Conservative Government will be optimistic about Britain’s future because we are comfortable with Britain’s past.

• Free arts organisations from dependence on the state
by giving them endowments
• Back the tourism industry
• Privatise the commercially successful Channel Four

Freeing our culture from political interference

• Simplify regulation of British broadcasting and communications

The last Conservative Government transformed the funding

• Support youth, grass roots and elite sport

of sport, the arts and our historic environment by creating
the National Lottery. We ensured that money from this
source was additional to Government spending, and
administered independently.
Labour have increasingly taken control of Lottery funds. The
rules which govern applications for Lottery funds are
excessively complex. We will reform them, so that they are
more accessible to small community groups.

We will set about freeing the arts from Government interference.
Using the proceeds from the sale of Channel 4 and
undistributed surpluses from the Lottery, we will create
a £3 billion endowment fund for cultural organisations.
This will dramatically extend freedom from State
dependency and political control.
Conservatives recognise the role of the arts in developing
the creative skills which are essential to Britain’s
future prosperity.

knowing who we are
40

41

a civilised country

“Conservat ives recognise
the role of the arts in
developing the creat ive skills

We will undertake a radical review of the Arts Council of

But our future success is threatened because too few

Freeing the media and

We will introduce early legislation to create a single

England and the Regional Arts Boards. We want to create a

young people get the chance to take part in sport at school.

communications industries

regulator for the media and communications industries

Conservatives will give back to headteachers and governors

Our best media companies lead the world in quality

the right to offer adequate time for sport. We will also give

and innovation.

less bureaucratic funding structure which delivers more for the
arts and for artists.
Britain’s £65 billion tourist industry is a powerful force for urban
and rural regeneration. Under Labour, Britain’s trade deficit in
tourism has doubled, and tourist businesses have been hit by
a tide of new regulations. We will back Britain around the
world by increasing support for the British Tourist Authority and
restoring a voice for English Tourism. This will be all the more

further protection to playing fields.

market and Britain was well placed to benefit from the

clubs to apply for charitable status, strengthening their

convergence of media and communications technologies.

grassroots sport, and helping to safeguard their assets
for future generations.

important in the light of the disastrous impact of Foot and
Mouth disease on the whole sector.

We will look to streamline the over-complex funding
structures for sport, reducing the number of quangoes

Championing sport

and devolving more funds to a more rationalised

The success of our athletes in the Sydney Olympics showed

network of governing bodies.

how important sport can be in creating a sense of national
pride. The dedication and skill of our Olympic team was
supported by funds from the National Lottery, established by
the last Conservative Government. We will ensure that our

Britain’s future prosperity.”

competition. We will liberate media companies from
outdated ownership rules and ensure that regulation is

Conservatives deregulated the telecommunications

We will reform the law to enable local voluntary sports

financial base and encouraging private investment in

charged with speeding up the introduction of

which are essential to

minimised, while protecting the vulnerable from
offensive material.
Our policy will deliver fair and independent regulation

But we are throwing away our head start. Labour have
stalled over liberalising telecommunications. The numerous
overlapping regulatory authorities in the communications
industries urgently need rationalising.
The next Conservative Government will make Britain
once again a beacon of competition in the communications
industries.

of the BBC. The regulator will require the BBC to
make the most of its assets for the benefit of the
licence fee payer but to rein in any expansion plans
which are hostile to competition.
We will ensure that religious broadcasters have
fair and equal access to future competitions for local,
national, digital and programme service licences.

“ To ny Blair said that the Dome would be a vivid symbol of
Labour’s Britain. That is exactly what it was. Step inside and you
could be any where - it was banal, anonymous and rootless.
It lacked a sense of Britain’s history or culture.”

We will privatise Channel 4, while maintaining its public
service remit. The State has no business owning a
commercial TV company.

elite athletes get the funding they need to achieve excellence
in the future.

42

43

a proud
democracy
Common sense means fewer politicians
and more local decision-making

• Transfer power from central government to effective local councils
• Local referendums before large increases in Council Tax

Britain’s democracy has always been one of our greatest strengths. It has made our country what it is, and has embodied and defended our freedoms.
But after four years of Labour, the way we govern ourselves has been abused. We have an arrogant and complacent Government which ignores Parliament and people. We have the
anomaly of MPs from Scotland and Northern Ireland voting on laws that apply only to England and Wales. The House of Lords, historically a source of balance and independence, has
suffered a botched reform.
People identify with their local communities. But under this Government they are being marginalised by alien new regional bureaucracies that are costly, unaccountable and unnecessary.
Our constitution is being perverted, and faith in politics and politicians is at an all time low.
It’s time for common sense.
A Conservative Government will revitalise our democracy by giving more power to local people, and once more placing Parliament at the centre of our national life.

Revitalising local government

not use its powers to cap local council budgets.

People feel at home in their local communities, be they

We will abolish many of the national targets and plans that

counties, towns, villages or parishes.

local councils are forced to follow by Whitehall.

But real communities are being weakened by too much

Alongside this policy of granting greater freedom to the best

government from Whitehall, and by the imposition of artificial

councils must come some protection from abuses by the worst.

Britain’s constitution has never been set in stone, but

new layers of government with which people don’t identify.

So we will look at ways in which local councils proposing

has evolved and adapted to cope with the changing

The next Conservative Government will revolutionise the

increases in their budgets significantly above the rate of

circumstances of different centuries. Because Labour

attitude of central government to local government.

inflation can be obliged to hold a local referendum on the

do not understand how the history and stability of our

increase in the Council Tax which this would entail. We will

democratic structures have underpinned our national

also retain Section 28 of the Local Government Act.

life, they have altered them in a crude, unthinking

• Abolish artificial regional tiers of administration in England
• Reform Parliament so that only English and Welsh MPs vote on exclusively
English and Welsh matters
• Strengthen parliamentary scrutiny of the Government

The best councils offer excellent value for money and serve
their communities well. Conservatives believe that councils

knowing who we are
44

enterprise and development back to county councils, and to
unitary authorities where appropriate, and save the £70 million
a year that the RDAs are spending in administration.

Restoring balance in the constitution

way, often for narrow party advantage.

that have such a track record of success should be trusted

Labour have introduced a new tier of regional bureaucracy.

with more power. They will be able to become “free councils”.

But almost no-one identifies with the arbitrary regions into

As Conservatives have demonstrated in our constructive

We will devolve financial and administrative power from central

which the country has been carved up - they owe nothing to

participation in the Scottish Parliament and Welsh

government to them, and establish a stronger link between

where people feel they actually belong,

Assembly, we will work to ensure devolution is a success.

the money they raise and the money they spend.

We will abolish the Regional Development Agencies that

But we will restore balance to our vandalised democracy.

We believe that local citizens should decide how much their

the Government has introduced and scrap Labour’s plans for

council will spend. The next Conservative Government will

new Regional Assemblies. We will give responsibility for
45

a proud democracy
When Parliament is discussing something that affects the
whole of the United Kingdom, all MPs should vote. But only
English and Welsh MPs will be entitled to vote on
Government Bills relating to England and Wales. And

Northern Ireland
As a Unionist party, we value the contribution that
Northern Ireland makes to the United Kingdom.

time to deliver
that weakens the ability of the police and army to uphold
the rule of law and protect the people of Northern Ireland
against terrorism.

Conservatives have always upheld the principle that the

Restoring faith in politics

future of Northern Ireland will be determined solely by

At a time when the Government has interfered as never

democracy and consent and never by violence. The next

In changing the way Parliament works our overriding objective

before in everyone’s lives, they have abandoned any pretence

Conservative Government will resolutely maintain Northern

will be to strengthen the ability of the House of Lords and the

of accountability. No wonder the British people

Ireland’s position within the United Kingdom, in accordance

House of Commons to hold the Government to account. We

have become disillusioned with politicians.

with the democratically expressed wishes of the greater

will strengthen the independence of the House of Lords as

number of its people.

English MPs alone will vote on the remaining laws which
apply exclusively to England.

an effective revising chamber by requiring new members to
be approved by an independent appointments commission.
We will set up a Joint Committee of both Houses of
Parliament in order to seek consensus on lasting reform in
the House of Lords. We would like to see a stronger House of
Lords in the future, including a substantial elected element.
Conservatives will support reforms of the House of
Commons to make ministers more accountable. As a first
step we will once again require the Prime Minister to appear
before the House of Commons twice a week, and make sure
that Select Committees are independent of party managers.
We reaffirm our commitment to keeping Britain’s voting
system for general elections.

46

Conservatives continue to believe that the Belfast Agreement
offers the best chance for lasting peace and political stability.
The key to progress is maintaining confidence on all sides.
So the next Conservative Government will work tirelessly and
constructively to bring about the full implementation of all
aspects of the Agreement, including the decommissioning of
illegally-held terrorist arms and explosives.
We remain unstinting in our praise for the work of the
Royal Ulster Constabulary and the armed forces in fighting
terrorism. Improvements to the overall security situation
will inevitably bring about changes, but reductions in security

Conservatives have a vision of what our country can be when it is true to its
own character.

We want to return to people responsibility for their lives
by reducing the level of political interference and regulation.
And that involves reducing the number of politicians.
We will abandon the Government’s plans for a new tier
of regional politicians in England. We will cut the number

We want strong families and enterprising business. We want a free and
responsible society. We want to govern ourselves, confident in a stable and
trusted constitution. This manifesto sets out the vision that will inspire the
next Conservative Government.
It’s time for a Government that will deliver.
It’s time to support marriage and the family; time for a war on crime; time
to cut taxes and regulation; time for our schools and hospitals to benefit
from choice and freedom; time to show respect to our pensioners; time for
real savings not welfare dependency; time to endow our universities; time
to rebuild our inner cities; time to end the crisis in the countryside; time
to be in Europe, but not run by it.

of government ministers and, once we have strengthened
parliamentary scrutiny, we will reduce the size of the
House of Commons.
And we will cut the number of political advisers and spin

It’s time for common sense.

This manifesto is available on the Conservative
Party’s website: www.conservatives.com
For partially-sighted and blind people a special
audio version has been produced. A large print
edition is also available.
Summary versions are available in Bengali, English,
Gujarati, Hindi, Punjabi and Urdu.
For more information please call the Conservative
Party’s Information Unit on 020 7222 9000 or email
manifesto@conservatives.com

doctors employed, at the taxpayer’s expense, to serve
government ministers.

Please also use these contact points for accessing
information about the manifesto for people with
learning disabilities.

will only be made on the basis of the prevailing terrorist
threat. Conservatives will not countenance any measure

47

Promoted by David Prior on behalf of the Conservative Party both of 32 Smith Square, London SW1P 3HH.
Printed by Pindar plc, Thornburgh Road, Eastfield, Scarborough, North Yorkshire YO11 3UY.

www.conservatives.com

£2.50

9 780850 709261

01

time for common sense
