Sinn Féin Westminster Election Manifesto 2001
Building an Ireland of Equals

Introduction from Gerry Adams
A Chara,
The last decade has been one of delivering change
and rapid growth for Sinn Féin across the island.
In the last ten years the Sinn Féin peace strategy
has delivered the Irish Peace Process which led to
the Good Friday Agreement. Since its signing we
have worked to implement and expand the allIreland aspects of the Agreement. Our two
Ministers, Baribre de Brún and Martin McGuinness,
have brought an entirely new people-centred
agenda to their ministries in Health and Education
— they are delivering real change.
However, the potential to deliver the sort of
fundamental changes still required is being
threatened by the actions of the Ulster Unionist
Party and the failure of the British Government to
honour its commitments under the Good Friday
Agreement.
Following these elections there will be important
negotiations to ensure that commitments on
policing, demilitarisation and equality are
honoured. If these negotiations are to be
successful then Sinn Féin has to go back to the
negotiating table with an increased mandate. Every
vote counts.
Tá seans agat do phairt a glachadh ag an am
stairiúl seo.

By supporting Sinn Féin you can strengthen the
search for peace and be part of the process of
delivering real change. Is féidir leat cur leis an
phrÚiseas síochána ar fud na hoileáin ma thugann
tú tacaíocht do Shinn Féin. Thig leat bheith
pairteach ag tabhairt fíor athrú ar an sochaí seo.
Sinn Féin is the only all-Ireland party in this
election. Whether in Derry or Kerry, West Belfast or
Dublin South-West, people have the opportunity to
vote for republicans. We are the only party with a
vision which looks beyond partition and inequality
and towards a new, independent Ireland based on
justice, equality and prosperity.
On June 7th, I am asking you to join with us in
delivering real change.
Tá a lán obair le déanamh againn bígí linn.
Is mise,
Gerry Adams MP

Delivering Peace
Sinn Féin is a republican party. We are the only allIreland party. Our goal is to see a united Ireland
which delivers real social and economic change.
We have been the driving force behind the Irish
Peace Process.
The Peace Process grew out of Sinn Féin's peace
strategy.

It has delivered the Good Friday Agreement and
offered us a route map out of conflict and into a
new Ireland based on equality and justice. The
Good Friday Agreement is an all-Ireland
agreement. It transcends partition and it offers a
new opportunity for people across the island.

Our peace strategy and the Peace Process which
it delivered can create change.

This potential, this opportunity, has still to be
delivered. Yet despite all of the obstacles, Sinn
Féin is committed and is determined to see the
potential of the Good Friday Agreement realised.

All-Ireland Politics

Throughout this entire process, Sinn Féin has been
the engine for change. We have given real
leadership.
We have been both flexible and imaginative but all
the time wedded to our belief that the changes
which are clearly necessary and indeed promised
under the Agreement must be delivered.
Sinn Féin has been consistent in demanding that
the Agreement is implemented in full. Since the
signing of the Good Friday Agreement we have
been involved in a number of public and private
negotiations with the two governments, with the
other political parties and with the White House.
On the policing issue we have consistently
demanded amendments to Peter Mandelson's
Police Act. We have been in the frontline not just in
demanding a decent police service, but on issues
of demilitarisation, an acceptable system of
criminal justice, equality and human rights for all.
We have honoured every commitment made under
the Good Friday Agreement and we now demand
that others do likewise.
Republicans have taken many risks for peace over
the past ten years. The IRA has maintained
cessations for almost six years. It has taken a
number of unilateral initiatives which have
advanced the Peace Process.
Sinn Féin has demonstrated leadership and
determination. We have been dynamic and have
met all of the challenges placed in front of us. We
will continue to do this. We will not be diverted from
demanding equality and justice.
We will continue to be a source of confidence and
strength, replacing conflict and division with peace
and opportunity.

With increased political strength this process and
the changes it will deliver will become irreversible.

Sinn Féin is the only all-Ireland party. The only
party with a strategy and policies for achieving Irish
unity and independence.
The Good Friday Agreement is an all-Ireland
agreement.
Over the last 12 months — through the new
political institutions created under the Good Friday
Agreement — the beginning of all-Ireland cooperation in the crucial fields of education, health,
environment, agriculture, transport and tourism is
occurring. In each of these areas, progress and
programmes of work are being advanced through
the implementation bodies.
Even at this embryonic stage, the potential is
obvious and it is clear that all-Ireland developments
would bring about considerable benefits to all of us
living on the island.
Notwithstanding the current difficulties, it is
essential that such co-operation continues.
Representation
• For the right for those elected at parliamentary
elections in the Six Counties to attend and
participate in the proceedings of Leinster House;
• For citizens in the Six Counties to be given the
right to vote in referendums and presidential
elections, currently held on a 26-County basis.
All-Ireland co-operation
• To bring an end to the unlawful actions of David
Trimble;
• To actively develop and advance the potential of
the Implementation Bodies;
• To make available the appropriate financial and
other resources to ensure that substantial progress
can take place.

Politics
• To bring a republican and socialist analysis into
the heart of politics throughout Ireland in local
government, Leinster House, Assembly and SixCounty Executive;
— Harmonisation of financial incentives and
Corporation Tax across the island;
— Establishment of an all-Ireland health service;
— Environmental standards and policies to be coordinated on an all-island basis;
— Development of an all-Ireland approach to
education;
— Establishment of an all-Ireland constitutional
court;
— Strategic planning of infrastructure.

In all of the negotiations which we have had with
the British Government since this time, we have
repeatedly raised this important issue.
We recognise that effective representation requires
sustained campaigning and lobbying outside
Ireland. This is why Sinn Féin opened offices in
Washington and London. This is why we have been
engaged in a vigorous campaign in England,
Scotland and Wales with political parties on the
implementation of the Patten recommendations on
policing and other issues.
As an Irish republican party committed to a united
Ireland we do not believe that there is any value in
Irish MPs sitting in a British parliament.
This is proven by the attendance record of those
who make a virtue of being in Westminster but
actually seldom show up there.

Respresenting your interests

Sinn Féin is not prepared to pledge allegiance to
British royalty and we have shown that you do not
have to take an oath of allegiance to the British
queen to be an effective advocate of Irish voters'
rights and entitlements.

Prior to the 1997 Westminster elections, Sinn Féin
made it clear that successful candidates intended
to make use of the facilities and resources
available in the British Parliament.

Our MPs will continue to lobby for facilities at
Westminster and when the British Government
restores these rights it is our intention to use these
facilities in the interests of our constituents.

At that time, all MPs were entitled to use facilities
at Westminster whether or not they took the Oath
of Allegiance to the British queen and their seats in
the chamber. This was a British parliamentary
tradition (known as 'Erskine May') which has been
in existence for more than 150 years.
Within days of the successful election of Gerry
Adams in West Belfast and Martin McGuinness in
Mid-Ulster, the then Speaker of the House of
Commons, Betty Boothroyd, announced that she
was setting aside parliamentary practice and
tradition and banning the two Sinn Féin MPs from
using resources and facilities.
Sinn Féin protested against the decision. It is a
discriminatory act aimed solely against Sinn Féin
and our electorate. Gerry Adams and Martin
McGuinness met Betty Boothroyd and eventually
took the issue to court. But the case was lost
because, under the British Constitution, the British
parliament is sovereign and the courts are unable
to intervene.

Policing — A new beginning
The Good Friday Agreement promised a new
police service that would be: "impartial;
representative; free from partisan political control;
efficient and effective; infused with a human rights
culture; decentralised; democratically accountable
at all levels".
Although Sinn Féin believes that the Patten
recommendations did not go far enough, we made
clear that, if implemented, they might provide a
threshold from which a new police service could
develop.
Sinn Féin has worked hard on this issue because
we want to see a new beginning to policing. We put
detailed, reasonable and practical proposals to the
British Government on numerous occasions. And
while we made some progress, the British
Government's position falls short of the promises of

the Good Friday Agreement
recommendations of Patten.

and

the

• It does not give us common ownership of policing
for all;
• It does not remove the unionist ethos and
emblems;
• It does not provide for real democratic
accountability;

• User-friendly police buildings, vehicles and
uniforms.
Human rights
• Disbanding the Special Branch political police as
a 'force within a force';
• A human rights ethos and culture for everyone in
the new police service;
• Banning lethal-force plastic bullets;

• It does not provide for the mechanisms to identify
and expel the torturers and abusers of human
rights.

• Powers of independent inquiry which must be
effective, efficient and capable of being promptly
put to use in issues such as collusion;

More can be achieved
Sinn Féin believes that much more can be
achieved. We are calling for the British
Government to amend the legislation and do what
they promised in the Good Friday Agreement when
the Patten Commission was established and at
Hillsborough on May 6th 2000.

• Repressive legislation which remains in place
must be removed.
Nationalists and republicans have suffered 80
years of RUC oppression. A new police service is
the prize we must win for the future. It is one that
Sinn Féin is committed to achieving.

Democratic accountability
Democratic accountability is a right. The British
Secretary of State and the RUC Chief Constable
have too much power.
Power needs to be given to the:• New Policing Board;
• District Partnership Boards;
• Oversight Commissioner;
• Ombudsman.
Common ownership
A police service must be in the ownership of all the
people. This means:• It must be representative of the community it
serves;
• Name, symbols and emblems must be politically
and culturally neutral;
• It must be community-based;

Equality
Nationalists have endured decades of social and
economic
discrimination.
Inequalities
in
employment, education, household incomes,
housing conditions and access to healthcare all
provide evidence of the enduring link between
poverty and inequality.
Sinn Féin's goal is to replace poverty through
inequality with prosperity through equality for all.
We are working to ensure that government policies
target poverty and inequality and that TSN be
placed on a statutory basis to ensure real
accountability.
Equality department
Sinn Féin is campaigning for a fully-resourced
Department of Equality in line with the rest of
Ireland. During negotiations, other parties resisted
this, relegating equality to a unit within the Office of
the First and Deputy First Ministers. The equality
agenda has been retarded and undermined.

Parity of esteem
• Legislation to guarantee parity of esteem and
equality of treatment for the Irish language,
heritage and culture;

enforce legislation and policy that discriminates
against political ex-prisoners participating as
equals in all aspects of social and economic life.
Sinn Féin is campaigning for:
• The release of all political prisoners;

• Provisions for the expression of nationalist and
republican sentiments in the display of monuments
and symbols that command civic space in public
areas, buildings, towns and city centres in equal
measure to those of unionism;
• Workspace and working environments to be
governed by the principle of equality or neutrality;
• Public bodies such as the BBC, Translink, local
universities, colleges of further and higher
education, and housing associations to be
compelled to comply with the equality legislation.
Unemployment
Despite 30 years of fair employment legislation,
recent statistics show Catholic males two times
more likely than Protestant males to be
unemployed. Catholics also constitute more than
70 per cent of the long-term unemployed;
• Targets and timetables for eliminating
unemployment — the Good Friday Agreement
promised "the progressive elimination of the
differential in unemployment rates between the two
communities". Sinn Féin will fight to have that
commitment placed on a statutorybasis.
Anti-nationalist discrimination
• An end to discrimination in employment on
sectarian and racist grounds such as those
practices deemed to be in the 'interests of [British]
national security';
• An overhaul of the Civil Service to eradicate
institutionalised discrimination. The exclusion of
Irish nationals from positions in public bodies in the
North of Ireland, especially senior grades, must be
ended.
Prisoners
The British Government has failed in its
commitment under the Good Friday Agreement to
"facilitate the reintegration of prisoners into the
community by providing support". It continues to

• The removal of all legal, procedural and policy
obstacles to full equality for political ex-prisoners.

The Economy
A new social and economic order in Ireland will
cherish all our people equally and prize equality
and social justice.
Sinn Féin's economic policy objectives are to:• Provide sustainable and dignified livelihoods for
all;
• The development of economic, social, natural and
cultural resources;
• Fulfil the needs and aspirations of the people of
Ireland through the creation of economic structures
which reflect their social and cultural values.
Everyone, irrespective of their background, should
be able to gain secure, well-paid, long-term
employment in a fair working environment.
Sinn Féin's strategic approach to the economy
includes:• The creation of an all-Ireland economy;
• The transformation of the war economy in the
North of Ireland into a productive peace-time
economy;
• The elimination of the economic distortions
created by partition and peripheralism;
• Campaigning against poverty which is being
exacerbated by the increasing globalisation of the
marketplace.
If economic and social regeneration in Ireland is to
be successful, there will need to be:• Investment in and the development of indigenous
Irish manufacturing;

• Harmonisation of financial incentives for industrial
development and investment;

economic policy, a strategy to tackle peripheralism,
and the promotion of social justice and inclusion.

• Penalties imposed on grant-aided foreign industry
which exploits cheap-labour economies by
relocating away from Ireland after being given
financial support here;

Education

• Investment in social infrastructure;
• Education and training for all, at all stages of
personal development;
• A proactive approach to economic development in
the wider context of social, political, cultural and
environmental priorities.
Delivering change
Through Sinn Féin's involvement in the Assembly
and the North-South bodies, we have successfully
pushed for economic development in an all-Ireland
context:• Opposed the use of the Barnett formula to
calculate the block grant;
• Called for tax-gathering powers for the North of
Ireland as a precursor to reunification;
• Worked for the development of the North-South
body for trade and business development,
InterTrade Ireland;
• Promoted equality and social justice within all
economic policy initiatives, and we are addressing
the deficiencies of the new Targeting Social Need
policy.
Through Sinn Féin's chairing of the Finance and
Personnel Committee, we have initiated a public
inquiry into the use of private finance to fund
investment in the public sector (PFI/PPP).
We have also been been the catalyst for the
development of alternatives to ensure that our
public services can overcome the legacy of underfunding.
Through Sinn Féin's chairing of the Enterprise,
Trade and Investment Committee, we have
completed a public inquiry into the fundamentallyflawed Strategy 2010 economic policy initiative.
We have highlighted the need for an all-Ireland

Education is a fundamental human right. It enables
young people to become aware of themselves as
human and social beings who are enabled and
encouraged to take up positions of leadership and
responsibility in society. Sinn Féin advocates an
education system based on the key principles of:
• Equality
• Choice
• Accessibility
• Excellence
Education is about partnership. Schools should
reflect a creative and a mutually-affirming
partnership of parents, students, teachers,
ancillary staff, governors, trustees, other partners
in education and the local community. The student
must be at the centre of education.
Delivering on commitments
In 2000-2001, as Minister for Education, Martin
McGuinness has delivered:All-Ireland
• Regular interaction between Education
Departments, North and South, including several
all-Ireland education working groups established
under the North-South Ministerial Council.
Equality
• An approved equality scheme for the Department
of Education;
• An Equality Division in the Department of
Education.
Investment
• Support for small rural schools;
• A massive and unprecedented £200 million
capital investment in schools in the Six Counties;

• Increase to 75 per cent pre-school provision.

curriculum;

Eleven Plus & League Tables

• Core flexibility in the delivery and content of the
curriculum to allow for innovative, local solutions;

• A fundamental review of the post-primary
provision, including the 11-Plus;

• Fair pay and conditions for teachers;

• An end to the publication of the School
Performance Tables.

• A reduction of the bureaucratic workload on
teachers;

Irish language and integrated schools

• More focussed support for Special Educational
Needs and more mainstreaming of children with
Special Educational Needs.

• The creation of an Irish-medium promotional
body, Comhairle na Gaelscolaiochta;
• The setting up of Irish-medium Trust Fund,
Iontaobhas na Gaelscolaiochta;

Health

• New viability criteria for Irish-medium and
integrated schools.

Years of under-funding have left the health service
on a life-support system. Lack of resources has led
to ever-growing waiting lists, fewer beds and a lack
of basic services to maintain people in their homes.

Information Technology
• Significant increase in allocation of computers to
teachers;
• Arrangements being made for a substantial
increase in ICT provision in schools.
Sinn Féin will campaign for:
• Increased all-Ireland harmonisation;
• Taking forward the equality agenda;
• The 11-Plus to be abolished;
• A fair and inclusive post-primary school system;
• A continued increase in pre-school provision;
• A significant increase in funding to Target Social
Need;

Sinn Féin is committed to:
• An all-Ireland health service which would
harmonise and maximise use of resources;
• Equality of access to modern and quality health
and social services which command public
confidence;
• Democratisation of the health service to include
patients, staff organisations and political
representatives in policy, planning and decisionmaking;
• Eradication of the social, cultural and economic
inequalities (including poverty and disadvantage)
which have a direct and detrimental bearing on
public health.
Delivering on commitments

• Support for schools, teachers and pupils in
disadvantaged areas;

As part of Sinn Féin's drive to provide a more
effective and patient-centred health service
throughout the island of Ireland, Minister for Health
Bairbre de Brún has initiated a range of actions,
reviews and public consultations designed to:

• Continued
education;

Irish-medium

• Improve the standard and efficiency of health care
service delivery;

• Creativity to be encouraged in all areas of the

• Develop a strategic direction for health, social
services and public safety which will deliver

• Proper education funding for marginalised and
disadvantaged groups;

development

of

modern, effective, accessible
command public confidence.

services

and

• A public appointments awareness campaign to
attract candidates from all sections of the
community;

Improving hospital care
• Making department publications available in Irish.
• Acute hospital services review;
Health and well-being programmes
• Action frameworks to reduce waiting lists and
ease winter pressures on intensive care provision
and community care;
• A cardiac services review to improve access and
treatment times;
• A two-week out-patient appointment target in
cases of suspected breast cancer;

• Initiating a public health strategy which addresses
the social and economic determinents of ill-health
and health inequalities;
• Funding 15 Sure
disadvantaged children;

Start

schemes

for

• Funding 16 community-based projects reducing
the level of drug-related harm;

• An end to compulsory market-testing.
• A strategy to reduce alcohol-related harm;
All-Ireland health care
• Establishing working groups and
implementation of programmes of work on:

the

— A & E planning
— Cancer research
— Health promotion
— Major emergencies planning
Primary and community care
• Legislation to end GP fund-holding;
• Consultation to develop a new system of
community-based local health and social care
groups;
• A Social Care Council to improve protection of
vulnerable patients and raise standards of practice.
Children and young people's services
• Expanding residential childcare places;
• Extra child and adolescent in-patient psychiatric
beds.
Equality
• Introducting a departmental equality scheme;
• Approving a new Targeting Social Need action
plan;

• A strategy to reduce the high level of teenage
pregnancies.

Farming in Crisis
Our agricultural industry is in crisis — and not just
over foot and mouth, although that is the most
pressing issue today. We need to tackle this crisis
but we also need to look at the underlying reasons
which created it in the first place. One of the issues
which this crisis highlights is the need for an islandwide approach to agriculture.
In the Six Counties, the average net farm income
declined by 65 per cent between 1996/97 and
1997/98. Sinn Féin wants to keep farming families
on the land, supports agricultural diversification
and mixed and organic farming. Sinn Féin will work
for:
• An all-Ireland agricultural strategy, recognising
the different needs of farm families in different
regions;
• Early retirement schemes for farmers;
• Training for those who wish to work off the farm
and adequate rural employment;
• Recognition of farm-family income as providing
the most appropriate means of measuring income
distribution;

• Training in marketing skills;
• An environmentally sensitive programme for the
development of forestry and fisheries;
• Development of a food safety strategy.

• The Department of Agriculture must develop a
strategy to take account of women in agricultural
statistics and introduce quota systems to ensure
their adequate representation in farming
organisations.

Rural development
On rural development Sinn Féin will work for:

Sinn Féin is committed to creating environmental
standards on a co-ordinated island-wide basis.

• Long-term funding;
• The lessons of the the Leader Programmes to be
integrated into a long-term national strategy;
• Regional assemblies to act as a focus for rural
regeneration;
• Proper remuneration for people involved in rural
community initiatives;
• A coherent
development;

strategy

Environment

for

rural

economic

• The Department of Agriculture and Rural
Development to assume the central policy focus for
rural development;
• Rural health, education, employment and
transportation all require concerted action across
appropriate departments;

We are committed to the principle of sustainable
development. We believe that all economic activity
and policy decisions should be environmentally
proofed to ensure no needless damage is inflicted
to an island environment already under severe
pressure from unnecessary pollution and inefficient
waste management strategies. Sinn Féin will work
for:• Devolution of powers over the quality of life to
local authorities, including the financial means to
fulfil responsibilities;
• Involvement of all interested groups in the
planning and implementation of policy;
• Local authorities to co-operate with others on an
all-Ireland basis to develop environmental policies.

• Close links between these departments and coordinated programmes with the relevant
Implementation Bodies.

Planning

Equality

• A complete review of planning procedures;

The Department of Agriculture and Rural
Development is legally obliged to redress
inequalities in practices and policies. Sinn Féin will
work for:

• Planning legislation to focus on the needs of local
communities;

In relation to planning, Sinn Féin is working for:

• Employment and recruitment practices to be
monitored;

• The automatic right of access to information
relating to the health and environmental impacts of
new technologies such as telecommunications
advances;

• Policies to reverse under-representation of
minority groups within agricultural bodies;

• Planning regulations to be harmonised through
all-Ireland structures;

• Urgent examination of the reasons for underrepresentation of women in rural development
initiatives and recommendations on positive ways
of involving women;

• An audit of all existing mobile telephone base
stations and antennae, adequate control over radio
frequency fields generated, and the establishment
of physical exclusion zones around base stations.

Waste management
On waste management, Sinn Féin is working
for:• The establishment of an all-Ireland Zero-Waste
Agency to develop a strategic approach to the
planning, financing and implementation of this
strategy;
• Application of the 'producer pays' principle;
• Release of central funds and green taxes to local
authorities to support recycling, reduction and
reuse initiatives;
• An end to attempts to deploy incineration as a
means of waste disposal.

Children's Issues
Sinn Féin has a vision where all the children of
Ireland can live free from poverty and abuse, have
the best possible start in life, and grow into healthy,
confident adults who can play a full role in their
communities.
Young people under 18 make up one third of our
population. One in three children live in poverty.
We have one of the highest rates of child abuse in
Europe. Many children have no safe space in
which to play, and others suffer from discrimination
and injustice. Sinn Féin has worked to draw
attention to and address the needs of children.

Sellafield

We are concerned about the lack of co-operation
on the registration and vetting of those who have
committed offences against children.

On Sellafield, Sinn Féin will work for:-

Sinn Féin will work for:-

• The closure of Sellafield and an end to the
dumping of nuclear waste in the Irish Sea.

• A Commissioner and Junior Minister for Children.
We welcome the decision to appoint a
Commissioner but will continue to fight for the
appointment of a Minister so that children
throughout Ireland have independent and political
representation;

Water and air
On water and air quality, Sinn Féin will work
for:• An all-Ireland strategy to protect water and air
quality;
• A regulatory body capable of setting targets for
the reduction of particular pollutants over a period
and meeting these targets;
• Resources to encourage change by means of the
'polluter pays' principle and the ring-fencing of
revenues generated by green taxes for antipollution programmes.
Climate change
On climate change, Sinn Féin is working for:• The climate change levy to discourage the
production of greenhouse gases;
• A reduction levy to encourage the use of new
technologies designed to reduce dependency on
fossil fuels and encourage renewable and
environmentally sustainable energy sources.

• An all-Ireland register of paedophiles to ensure
that there is no hiding place for such people;
• Funding for children's services. Sinn Féin has
been instrumental in highlighting the lack of funding
for children's services. Our call for an investigation
into the funding of services led to a Health
Committee investigation and report into residential
care for children. We will continue to monitor and
lobby to ensure services for children receive the
funding they need;
• We will continue to work to make sure that
children's needs are not overlooked. Our challenge
is to improve the lives of all children in Ireland and
to ensure that children's needs and rights are at the
top of the political agenda.
Childcare
What value is economic development if the
children of the nation are not properly cared for?
We must ensure that children receive the best care
at all times. That includes care by parents in the

home, care by other family members, paid care by
childcare workers in the home, early childhood
education, créches and other facilities provided by
the community or voluntary sector or by private
concerns.

All-Ireland initiatives

Therefore Sinn Féin proposes:-

• All-Ireland integration of further education
institutes and technical colleges to meet the skills
and labour shortages;

• Support mechanisms to assist parents working in
the home;

• The development and expansion of a system of
further and higher education that is all-Ireland in
character and ethos;

• A heightening of the profile of the Irish language.
• Quality, affordable and accessible childcare
facilities;
• A childcare strategy which equally values all
children and parents, ensures the provision of
quality regulated childcare services, and prioritises
the needs of children and families experiencing
disadvantage and social exclusion. We need to
establish a centrally-assisted Childcare Service in
urban and rural areas and in tandem with existing
service-providers;
• Job sharing, flexi-time and flexi-place working
arrangements to be promoted as means of
facilitating parents who wish to participate in the
workplace and maintain a home life.

Funding
• Abolition of tuition fees;
• Restoration of means-tested student grants;
• Increased, targeted funding to pay fees for those
engaged in part-time study;
• Continued access to the social security system
for those who are studying and unemployed;
• A common system of student financial support
throughout Ireland.
Planning for the future

Higher and Further Education
As economic activity is increasingly skills-based,
individual and community success depends on
access to adult educational opportunities.
Opportunities have to be widened to include
sections of society traditionally excluded and
under-represented.
Sinn Féin is working for:-

• A new strategic plan for youth services on a
similar basis to the Strategic Plan for Education
Services. Resources to focus on a comprehensive
programme of retraining of those made redundant
from traditional industries;
• The designation of the Magee Campus of the
University of Ulster as a fully-fledged University of
Derry City in its own right as a major alternative
centre for the provision of full-time higher education
with up to 10,000 additional places.

Access
• An increase in participation rates within further
and higher education from those groups
traditionally excluded and marginalised;
• Universities and the colleges of further education
to provide an integrated route into higher
education;
• Wider and inclusive representation on public
bodies (e.g. the governing bodies of the institutes
of further education) to make them more
representative.

Human Rights
The Six-County state is synonymous with the
abuse of human rights, injustice and oppression.
Every major human rights agency in the world —
from Amnesty International to Helsinki Watch —
has indicted Britain for torture, summary execution
and extensive violations of human rights.
The establishment of a fair and equitable system of
justice is central to the building of a just society and
the development and maintenance of a human

rights culture in Ireland.
Civil and political freedom can only be achieved if
people have economic, social and cultural rights.
These must be firmly entrenched in legislation.

is well-documented. The willingness to issue Public
Interest Immunity Certificates to thwart
prosecutions and investigations and to tolerate
crown forces perjury within the criminal justice
system has meant the denial of justice in the SixCounty state since its inception.

Bill of Rights
In our wide-ranging submission to the Human
Rights Commission, Sinn Féin called for a
comprehensive Bill of Rights for the North as a first
step towards the fullest harmonisation of rights
standards throughout the island.
Citizens, especially those most vulnerable and
disadvantaged in our society, require a Bill of
Rights that holds out real possibilities to secure
their rights in a user-friendly way.
A Bill of Rights must therefore be people-centred
and rooted in impartial implementation and
enforcement mechanisms.
To this end, Sinn Féin has called for the
establishment of an all-Ireland Constitutional Court
and a Bill of Rights.
Human rights abuses
Human rights abuses must be well publicised and
the state should be held accountable for upholding
the law, implementing legislation and investigating
abuses in an open and an accountable fashion.
Delivering justice
The Good Friday Agreement explicitly accepted
that policing, repressive legislation and a
comprehensive review of the justice system had to
be addressed in tandem if justice is to be the
outcome.
The delivery of justice and protection of human
rights must include equality before the law. It must
be evident in all the institutions of a justice system
which conforms to the highest standards of
international human rights and the removal of
repressive legislation.
The victims of state violence and their relatives
have specific needs in terms of access to justice
and truth. The failure of the Director of Public
Prosecutions to prosecute crown forces personnel
for the use of lethal force in disputed circumstances

After 30 years of conflict and human rights
violations, clearly any Bill of Rights, if it is to be
effective, must be linked into radical changes in the
criminal justice and policing systems.
Repressive legislation must be rescinded and the
limiting remit and powers of the Human Rights
Commission must be expanded to instill public
confidence in its ability to champion and protect the
human rights of all citizens.
As a party we will strive to harmonise rights
throughout the island as outlined in the Good
Friday Agreement.

Regional Development
Ensuring an efficient and equitable regional
development strategy is an imperative for not only
the Six Counties but for the entire island economy.
It is crucial that when planning infrastructural
developments (particularly in the areas of roads,
rail, power, gas, and telecommunications) that the
negative effects of partition and the current eastwest bias in Six-County and 26-County regional
planning be tackled.
A just regional development policy will help ensure
that the economic benefits of state investment is
accessible by all and that decades of institutionallycreated disadvantage and under-development are
eradicated. This means that, in coming years, the
need to redress past imbalances in regional
development will involve concentration of
resources in those areas negatively affected by
partition, the conflict and deliberate policies of
neglect.
Sinn Féin will work for:• Strategic planning of roads, railways, water
resources, energy supplies and distribution, ports,
airports and telecommunications to take place on
an all-Ireland basis;
• Major investment in Irish transport infrastructure

both to improve the efficiency of our cities and
towns and to maximise economic and social links
between north and south, and east and west;

effectively stop many people from having the skills
in new technologies necessary in the modern
workplace;

• A reversal of the decline of the West and the
concentration of development in the Belfast and
Dublin metropolitan areas;

• Community access to telecommunications
technologies.

• Regional development policies which combat
unemployment, poverty and inequality;

Social Development

• Transparent and measurable equality targets, and
challenging the Regional Strategic Framework's
failure to address past patterns of discrimination
and disadvantage;

Disadvantage in our society can no longer be
tolerated. While we all want prosperity it cannot be
at the expense of those who are in need in our
changing society. The elimination of poverty and
social exclusion must be a major goal and an
objective of our political representatives.

• Responsibility for transport services and
waterways and resources to stay within the public
sector — an end to attempts by the British Treasury
to force the sale of Belfast Harbour lands and the
semi-privatisation of ports;
• Investment in roads, rail and ports, particularly in
the north-west region;
• More investment in public transport to alleviate
road congestion;
• An island-wide strategy to ensure that the best
use is made of the new gas resources that have
been discovered off the west coast;
• The rebuilding of the Derry to Monaghan railway
line and the development on an all-island basis of
the N2/R5.
Bridging the digital divide
There is widespread recognition throughout Irish
society of the need to invest in the new
communications and computer technologies that
have become the cornerstone of modern
economies. What is required is public sector
involvement to ensure equity in how these
communication resources are developed and that it
is done through the principle of social inclusion:
• Rolling out new cable infrastructure throughout
the island, not just larger towns and cities;
• Funding the deployment of new technologies to
schools;
• Training to end the literacy problems that

Sinn Féin calls for:• The creation of Priority Action Zones for urban
development;
• A recognition of the importance of the social
economy;
• Promotion of equality of opportunity between
persons of different religious beliefs, political
opinions, racial groups, ages, marital status and
sexual orientation;
• A fully-resourced benefit take-up campaign
should be initiated now which will lift people out of
poverty. High-quality independent advice centres
should be provided in all TSN (Targeting Social
Need) areas, with full and unrestricted resources
being made available to all benefit claimants to
allow for full participation in reviews, appeals and
tribunals;
• Policies, practices, expenditure and other
resources need to be targeted towards people,
groups and areas most in need. (TSN);
• Support for Restorative Justice schemes. The
question of justice is one which needs to be located
within the communities most concerned with the
need for accountability and transparency. As such,
Restorative Justice is an indispensable ingredient
in the empowerment of marginalised and
disadvantaged communities.

Housing

cent of asylum seekers in the Six Counties are
detained each year;

• Increase 'new build' by 1,000 per annum;
• The provision of accommodation to be made the
principal responsibility of an accountable Housing
Executive;
• Establish a specialist Homeless Forum to advise
on homelessness;
• Retain mandatory grants for owner-occupiers and
disabled people;
• Increase repair grants.

Anti-Racism
As Ireland becomes a more multicultural country,
the challenge is to embrace our growing diversity
as a source of strength and opportunity. To do this
we must begin by opposing racism, discrimination
and intolerance of any kind, wherever it occurs.
All of this requires a multi-faceted response:
politically, educationally and working with
communities and on an all-Ireland basis. Sinn Féin
welcomes the Directive by the European Council in
June 2000 requiring enhancement of the anti-racist
provisions of EU member states by 2003.
Sinn Féin calls on all political parties in Ireland to
sign an anti-racist pledge and make a commitment
that they will not play party politics with the race
issue and that they will not tolerate racism in any
form in their party.
Asylum seekers and refugees
• All asylum seekers who arrived in Ireland before
January 1st 2001 should be granted an amnesty;
• Measures to combat racism in Ireland through
policies such as incitement to hatred legislation,
racial discrimination; mainstreaming anti-racist
awareness and resourcing minority ethnic groups
and projects;
• A National Task Force on Immigration and
Emigration to develop a national policy and a new
Immigration Act;
• An end to detention of asylum seekers — 15 per

• An end to the use of voucher systems for asylumseekers;
• Amendments to the Dublin Convention to make
special provision for the experience of asylum
seekers and expedite their release from custody if
they have claimed refugee status in the 26
Counties and are then arrested as illegal entrants
in the Six Counties;
• The Equality Commission to demonstrate the
robustness of Section 75 of the Northern Ireland
Act to correct existing inequalities between people,
irrespective of race or ethnic origin.
Travellers
• Legislation transferring powers of responsibility
for Traveller accommodation from district councils
to the Housing Executive must be passed without
further delay;
• There is a need for legislation and adequate
funding to ensure the implementation of PSI
(Promoting Social Inclusion);
• Increased powers for the Equality Commission to
enable the Commission to legally challenge
discrimination.

Arts and Culture
Historically, arts, leisure and sports organisations
that promote Irish culture have been under-funded,
politically vetted and their work has been censored.
Mainstream funding has, in the past, been
allocated on a clear sectarian and class bias away
from games and activities that reflect Irish culture.
The potential for the development of the arts,
cultural and leisure sectors in Ireland is immense.
Recent political developments, particularly of an
all-island nature, could be underpinned by the
inclusive and unique scope of Irish arts and culture.
Furthermore, a more integrated, imaginative and
innovative arts and culture policy could open up
markets which generate indigenous business and
craft sectors and also serve as a dynamic to
reinvigorate Irish culture in general.

Economic development

Irish language and the arts

• Developing cultural and tourist industries in the
context of economic regeneration;

• Strategy and timetables to plot the expansion and
accessibility of the Irish language;

• Centralising and promoting Gaelic games and the
Irish language in tourism;

• Irish-language newspapers should be expanded
with support of government funding;

• Archaeological heritage to be prioritised as a
matter of urgency.

• All public authorities and public buildings should
operate a bilingual policy;

Expanding all-Ireland co-operation

• Greater access to TG4 and Radio na Gaeltachta;

• Encouraging an all-Ireland approach to the arts;

• Provision of two-way translation and translation
staff to support the right to use the Irish-language
in elected chambers

• Promoting tourism internationally as an all-Ireland
destination with a single agency to market tourism;
• Encouraging the media throughout Ireland to
dedicate more time to Irish arts and culture;
• Designating St Patrick's Day an all-Ireland public
holiday.
Driving the equality agenda

• Increasing support and resources for Foras na
Gaeilge;
• Supporting innovative projects to enhance the
level of Irish-language inclusion within society.

Women's Rights

• Developing an action plan and timetable which
fully implements the new Targeting Social Need
programme;
• Proposing strategic programmes for Irish arts,
culture and leisure activities;
• Prioritising public art projects for artists working in
Ireland.

The role of women in Irish society continues to be
undervalued and underpaid. Throughout public life
the voice of women is often absent, and in the
negotiations which are taking place to shape the
future of the island, the presence of women such
as Minister Bairbre de Brún is the exception rather
than the rule.

Arts policy

Sinn Féin is committed to bringing forward
measures to ensure that women are represented
equitably throughout society.

• Arts Councils, North and South, should work for
better co-operation in project co-ordination and
strategic development;

Access and participation

• Community arts provide individual development
and community empowerment and should be given
a special designation within arts and culture policy
and budgeted accordingly;
• Ensuring democratic accountability of the Arts
Council;
• Working to ensure ethnic minority participation;
• Developing
programmes.

comprehensive

disability

arts

• Measures to achieve equality of representation
both in political life and in all public appointments;
• The setting of time-scales to achieve equality of
outcome in employment structures, education and
training;
• The elimination of discriminatory and prejudicial
practices in the public service and private sector;
• The provision of childcare facilities and subsidies
for childcare;
• Training, education and community employment

opportunities for women in the home who wish to
return to the workforce.
Violence against women
A multi-faceted approach to eradicate violence
against women, including proper resources for
crisis centres.
