Strong
Leadership

e
g
n
a
h
C
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P
WESTMINSTER
ELECTION 2024

SINN FÉIN
MANIFESTO

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO

CONTENTS
A Message from Uachtarán Shinn Féin Mary Lou McDonald TD 

3

Introduction – Leas-Uachtarán Shinn Féin First Minister Michelle O’Neill MLA 

4

Strong Leadership 

5

Delivering Positive Change 

6

Standing up for Public Services 

7

Planning for Constitutional Change 

8

Building a Society for All 

9

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

Printed by Nova Print, 3c3, Twin Spires Complex,
155 Northumberland St, Belfast BT13 2AF.
Promoted by Conor Murphy, 51-53 Falls Road, Belfast BT12 4PD
Privacy Policies & Your Rights: www.sinnfein.ie/privacy

2

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO

A message from
Uachtarán Shinn Féin
Mary Lou
McDonald TD

families: healthcare, the cost of living,
housing, education, childcare.

Every day, Sinn Féin representatives are
providing strong leadership and delivering
positive change for communities across
Ireland.

We are focused on what is possible to
achieve if we work together, making politics
work, and demonstrating that positive
change is possible.

Nobody works harder for the communities
and people we represent.

On day one after the Westminster election,
Sinn Féin MPs will be working hard as part
of a strong all-Ireland Sinn Féin team to
deliver for all our people and communities.

Sinn Féin is on the side of workers and
families, working nationally and delivering
locally.
We are leading the way to build a stronger,
better and fairer country.

So I am asking you to send a clear message
in this election about what you want for the
future.

Tá muid ag obair le hÉireann a aontú.
The election on July 4th is a real opportunity
to step forward towards a better future.

To vote for strong leadership and positive
change.

For a society that defends you when you are
at your weakest, that encourages you when
you are at your strongest.

To vote for a party that is committed to
working for all.
On July 4th 
Vótáil Sinn Féin X.

Sinn Féin is committed to delivering on
the things that matter most to workers and
Mary Lou McDonald TD
SINN FÉIN PRESIDENT

3

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO

INTRODUCTION

Leas-Uachtarán
Shinn Féin First Minister
Michelle
O’Neill MLA

No matter what background or community
people come from, Sinn Féin MPs will work hard
and deliver on the things that matter to workers,
families and businesses – the cost of living, health,
education, good jobs and investing in local and rural
communities.

In this election people can send a clear message
about what they want for the future.
By voting for Sinn Féin people are endorsing strong
leadership, positive change, and a commitment to
work for all.
You have an opportunity to vote for decisions about
your life and your future to be made here, at home.

Change will only be delivered in the North by all of
us working together in the Executive and Assembly,
but this election gives people a chance to send a clear
message about the future they want.

You are supporting better funding for our public
services and rejecting years of Tory cuts which have
impacted the people of the North.

Let’s seize the opportunity to return the strongest Sinn
Féin team and keep moving forward to a new and
better future.

And you are supporting a stronger economy, creating
more well-paid jobs, and making childcare more
accessible and affordable.

On July 4th vótáil Sinn Féin X.

Michelle O’Neill MLA
SINN FÉIN VICE PRESIDENT
FIRST MINISTER

4

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO

STRONG
LEADERSHIP
In this election Sinn Féin is asking you to endorse strong leadership and positive change.
We are committed to delivering effective government, progressive change, and good public services,
working together with others in the Assembly, the Executive, and the North-South institutions.
Within the Executive Sinn Féin Ministers have set out a positive vision for change.
We want a stronger and fairer economy that delivers good jobs that pay well, offers workers secure
conditions, and supports local business.
We want to increase productivity and opportunities for skills and training, regional balance in
investment and job opportunities, accessible and affordable childcare - including for those with
Special Educational Needs - and meet climate change targets through a fair and just transition to net
zero.
We are committed to strong legal protections for workers and the right to join a trade union.
We are also committed to delivering the flagship projects committed to by the Executive such as the
Magee University expansion, building the A5 and A6 roads, and the redevelopment of Casement
Park.
Other projects that promote regional balance and the development of the all-island economy, such as
Narrow Water Bridge and the Ulster Canal, must also be delivered.
We want to protect our environment including addressing the challenges facing Lough Neagh and
the surrounding communities.
We will continue to fight for a fair funding model for the North which meets the needs of public
services.
Sinn Féin has been central to the fightback against the negative, cuts-driven and destructive policies
of the Tories, securing unique protections against the worst excesses of Brexit and austerity.
We will continue to offer strong leadership to all our people and communities with a commitment to
work together with everyone to deliver positive change.

5

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO

DELIVERING
POSITIVE CHANGE
Sinn Féin MPs are part of an all-Ireland team driving forward change on this island.
In the Assembly and Executive, the Dáil, the European Parliament, in council chambers and in
communities the length and breadth of Ireland, Sinn Féin representatives work together to represent
the best interests of all the people on this island.
Sinn Féin will stand up for workers, families and communities and be their voice where it counts.
People want decisions about their lives and their future to be made here, at home, by locally
accountable elected representatives and Ministers.
Dysfunction within British politics has brought us Brexit, austerity, a cost-of-living crisis, worsening
poverty rates, the erosion of public services, and an appalling betrayal of victims.
People here want positive change, and Sinn Féin is the only party that offers an all-island approach
to deliver that change.
Sinn Féin’s influence has been central to the incredible transformation that has taken place in the
North.
It was also key to securing protections that shielded Ireland from the worst impacts of Britain’s
catastrophic Brexit and austerity agenda.
In direct discussions with the British Government, the US, and the European Union we have
consistently stood up for the rights of citizens.
We are absolutely committed to continue our support and solidarity to the people of Palestine. We
will seize every opportunity to call for an immediate ceasefire, release of all hostages, humanitarian
aid, an end to genocide, and a free and independent Palestinian state.
Sinn Féin MPs will continue to prioritise the interests of people and communities.

6

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO

STANDING UP FOR
PUBLIC SERVICES
Sinn Féin is committed to standing up for workers, families, rural and urban communities, to ensure
they have access to first-class public services.
We need to see an end to the chronic underfunding of our public services and the undervaluing of
our public service workers.
Sinn Féin has consistently challenged the British Government’s under-funding of our public services
- including its failure to give certainty to community organisations and farmers regarding the
replacement of EU Funding.
We were central to negotiating an enhanced financial package that enabled the restoration of the
power-sharing institutions.
Sinn Féin Finance Minister Caoimhe Archibald allocated £688 million to prioritise public sector pay
awards on the restoration of the Executive.
Our Finance Minister has negotiated an improved funding arrangement for future budgets that will
better equip us to protect the public services that people expect and deserve.
We also want to see multi-annual budgeting so that the Executive is better equipped to plan and
make longer term investments such as tackling hospital waiting lists, rather than limiting departments
to managing their budgets on a year-to-year basis.
All Executive departments continue to be impacted by underfunding from the British Treasury.
Sinn Féin continues to demand serious and sustained investment to put Executive finances on a stable
footing.
This is vital to allow us to properly take forward the necessary investment in our public service
workforces.
We will also continue to press for the transfer of fiscal powers to the Executive to allow it to protect
existing services, and deliver improved public services going forward.
That includes powers for progressive taxation and the power to raise the minimum wage.
We cannot rely on a British Government which will always put its own interests above that of our
public services and the people who live here.
Decisions should be taken here by locally accountable Executive Ministers and not by ministers in
London who have repeatedly shown their disdain for our public services and workers.

7

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO

PLANNING FOR
CONSTITUTIONAL
CHANGE
The discussion on constitutional change is everywhere.
Partition has failed us all.
The Good Friday Agreement provides a peaceful and democratic pathway through a referendum
process to achieve a new Ireland within the EU.
Constitutional change requires an Irish government to prepare for the future in a strategic and
responsible fashion.
This includes establishing a Citizen’s Assembly which creates an opportunity for people to engage in
a dialogue addressing all the practical and positive possibilities that constitutional change can bring.
We need a process that facilitates generous engagement with those from all our communities on this
island.
There is now a real opportunity to shape a more prosperous future in a stronger, better and fairer
country.
An opportunity to create an efficient all-Ireland national health service, a sustainable housing system,
affordable childcare, and a fair and just transition to a carbon neutral economy.
Resumption of full EU membership as a consequence of unity would hugely benefit the all-island
economy.
Unity is central to building a modern, inclusive, accountable and fairer society and a country which
can play its full part in the world.
The Irish and British governments must set a date for a referendum on Irish unity.
Now is the time to plan for the future.

8

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH

2024 WESTMINSTER ELECTION
SINN FÉIN MANIFESTO

BUILDING A
SOCIETY FOR ALL
Sinn Féin is committed to an inclusive and diverse society based on equal rights and equal
opportunities for all citizens.
There can be no place for sectarianism, racism, misogyny, homophobia, age or disability
discrimination in our society.
The scourge of violence against women and girls must be addressed and an Ending Violence Against
Women and Girls’ (EVAWG) strategy must be delivered.
We want to create a safe, welcoming and inclusive society for all.
We want a society that values and celebrates the diversity of our identities, religious or none, sexual
orientation, gender, disability, age, or ethnic origin.
We want women to be able to access the safe and legal health services they are entitled to.
We want to see parity of esteem for Irish culture and language as provided for in the Good Friday
Agreement.
Sinn Féin will also uphold the rights of all victims of the conflict to information, maximum disclosure,
and truth.
We vigorously oppose the provisions outlined in the British Government’s Legacy Act.
It’s time to address the legacy of the past by implementing the mechanisms agreed at Stormont House
in a human rights compliant manner.
Sinn Féin will also continue to advocate for victims and survivors of institutional abuse to protect their
right to truth, justice and redress that they have been denied for too long.

9

CEANNAIREACHT LÁIDIR,
ATHRÚ DEARFACH
