Manifesto Ulster Unionist Party
The Ulster Unionist Party will DELIVER.
We are delivering on all the important issues
for you and will continue to do so on:
• the maintenance of the Union
• peace and democracy
• greater prosperity
• improved quality of life
• better services
• good education
• better health services.
• We will protect your rights
and the rights of children now and in the future.

page one

Rt Hon David Trimble with David Burnside

Jeffrey Donaldson with Rt Hon John D Taylor

Election 2001
We are advocates for the Union.
Unionism is not based on any sense of
elitism or particular religious belief. It is
based on a sense of Britishness - a shared
bond and a shared history with the rest of
the United Kingdom. It is inclusive: all
the peoples of the British Isles and all
sections of the community in Northern
Ireland have contributed to, and
participated in, that history.

Key priorities for the next Parliament
must be:

The Union offers all the people of
Northern Ireland the best prospect of peace
and fair play because it unites us all into a
genuinely plural, liberal, democratic state,
capable of accomodating social, cultural
and religious diversity, and offering
opportunity to all.

• to deliver a stronger Northern Ireland
economy and greater prosperity

• to enhance the role of Ulster Unionism
at the heart of British political life
• to deliver strengthened local democratic
accountability through a more effective
Northern Ireland Assembly
• to deliver a culture of lawfulness
throughout Northern Ireland

• to deliver a better quality of social,
cultural and environmental life
• to deliver better technical and vocational
education while maintaining high
academic standards
• to deliver a better, more effective health
service
• to deliver a reformed and enhanced local
government and a leaner, more efficient
public administration

page three

We intend to enhance
further the standing
of Unionism in the eyes
of our fellow citizens
and to make our party
a more significant
element of British
public life.
We do not intend to
ever let Ulster Unionism
be marginalised.

Westminster matters
Economic policy, all tax matters and the levels and type
of public expenditure are determined at Westminster.
Defence, Criminal Justice, Policing, European and
Foreign Affairs are also reserved to Westminster.
While the Assembly has a degree of autonomy over the
allocation of resources, the major contours of policy
in relation to devolved issues such as health and
education will still be decided nationally.
Stormont’s budget and agenda continues to be set in
London. Those who say Westminster is irrelevant,
therefore, are wrong.

The Ulster Unionist Parliamentary Party has earned
respect right across the House. Ulster Unionists have
regularly participated in UK delegations to the Council
of Europe, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. We intend
to enhance further the standing of Unionism in the eyes
of our fellow citizens and to make our party a more
significant element of British public life. We do not
intend to ever let Ulster Unionism be marginalised.

“I wish to say a sincere thank you

The Ulster Unionist Party seeks to make a contribution
to national life, not only in relation to Northern Ireland
matters, but over the whole gamut of national issues.
Nothing better symbolises our determination to be
British than our desire to participate in the affairs of the
British nation.

on behalf of the House and the people
of Northern Ireland to Mr Taylor
and Mr Maginnis who will leave us...
They have made a major contribution
to the business of the House
and to the benefit of the people they represent,
as well as all of the people
of Northern Ireland.”

The UUP is the only Northern Ireland political party
which plays a full part in Westminster debates, both in
the Commons and in the Lords. In this we build on
Ulster Unionist achievements, such as: fair
representation at Westminster; the Northern Ireland
Select Committee; the Northern Ireland Grand
Committee; and the inclusion of Northern Ireland into
UK legislation. Liaison with the Assembly, Westminster
and European Parliamentary teams ensures continuity
of policy and cross-fertilisation of ideas and
information. Thus we deliver modern dynamic
representation and maintain parity of services for
Northern Ireland.

page five

Rt Hon Dr John Reid
Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, 9th May 2001
“John Taylor has made an
enormous contribution,
and I thank him for that.”
Rt Hon Tony Blair, Prime Minister, 9th May 2001

The Assembly has
made a good start,
addressing the areas
neglected
under Direct Rule.
But collective decisionmaking needs to be
strengthened and the
Committees need to
enhance their policymaking role.

Delivering democratic accountability
As Unionists, we have a duty to make Northern Ireland
work, to prove it is not the “failed political entity” of
republican propaganda. It is also in the interests of
unionists to show to Northern nationalists that working
with us in Northern Ireland provides a better future than
any United Ireland. Our approach will continue to be
positive. We will continue to engage with our
government and others to ensure unionist concerns are
not sidelined.
The Assembly has made a good start, addressing the
areas neglected under Direct Rule, notably our
economic infrastructure. Crises such as Foot and
Mouth show the value of locally accountable decision
making. At the same time we work loyally with the
national framework of the United Kingdom.
The Joint Ministerial Committees with colleagues in
London, Cardiff and Edinburgh have made a good
start. We want to build on them. We also want to
enhance the “Council of the Isles” - the British Irish
Council which we believe has real potential for
the future.

The Assembly is jeopardised by the failure of terrorist
organisations to disarm, to indicate demonstrably to
society that their campaigns are at an end. Inclusive
government cannot be sustained indefinitely in such
circumstances. The offer of partnership between
equals based on respect for each other’s identities and
for the law that we made in 1997 stands. But the
UUP will not be party to any attempt to bury the
decommissioning issue or ignore it as other political
parties do. To do so would threaten democracy and
public safety.
We regret that others play down the threat to peace
and democracy from paramilitaries and have so far
failed to deliver their pledges.
“...if ...these provisions have been shown to be ineffective, we
will support changes to these provisions to enable
them to be properly effective in preventing such people
from holding office.”
Rt Hon Tony Blair, Prime Minister, 10 April, 1998
“For many unionists there is the fear that Sinn Fein seeks
to pocket the maximum sectoral advantage from the

The UUP is as committed to making the Assembly a
success. Under Direct Rule, decisions were made by
London ministers and the bureaucracy. Furthermore,
the Assembly provides unionists with a veto over policy
decisions in Northern Ireland and over cross-Border cooperation. The Party is committed to good relations with
the Republic of Ireland but they must be based in mutual
advantage, not ideological nationalist schemes. But
collective decision-making within the administration
needs to be strengthened. The Committees have worked
well in developing accountability, but we need to enhance
their role in policy making.

page seven

Agreement... and then will fail to honour their
decommissioning obligations... the SDLP would rigorously
enforce the terms of the Agreement and remove from office
those who had so blatantly dishonoured their obligations.”
Seamus Mallon, Deputy Leader, SDLP 13 November, 1998

Cecil Walker listening to a Police Constable in North Belfast

All sections of society
have a responsibility
to develop a culture
of lawfulness. Casual
violence, gangsterism
and racketeering
must be tackled.

Delivering a culture of lawfulness
Government must remain vigilant and ready to deal
with all residual terrorism while organised crime and
racketeering are an increasing threat as the paramilitary
organisations are turning into armed gangsters. It is also
important to retain the integrity of the Royal Ulster
Constabulary - it is essential that we have an effective
and efficient police force.

We have new challenges to face in the fight against
crime - cross-border smuggling of fuel and animals
which has undoubtedly lead to the foot-and-mouth
outbreak, the appalling drugs trade, and racketeering
generally. These criminals think they are beyond the
law, but the RUC and society must ensure that they are
brought to justice.

At the same time, all sections of society have a
responsibility to develop a culture of lawfulness. We
cannot continue with some sections of society behaving
as if they owe no duty to any law or any administration.
The casual violence on our streets, gangsterism and
racketeering must be tackled.

The UUP supports the creation of an Anti-Intimidation
Unit to vindicate the right of those who suffer at the
hands of paramilitaries - as in the Northern Ireland
Select Committee Report. We will also continue to
press for the use here of the measures that broke the
Mafia in the USA - the admissibility of “wiretap”
evidence, confiscation of criminally acquired assets and
legal measures directed against groups of racketeers.

Developing a culture of lawfulness goes further than all
parties supporting the police and participating in the
new Police Board. Churches, schools, business,
community groups must all row in behind the police
and work to develop a culture where keeping the law,
restraining the wrongdoer and helping to maintain a
free, peaceful and orderly atmosphere in all walks of life
comes naturally.
Ulster Unionists will play their role in developing a
culture of lawfulness. We will support policing despite
bad political decisions of government or any mistakes in
policing. We will also resolutely oppose any attempt to
accommodate terrorism within the field of law and
order by, for example, a two-tier police force - or
so-called “community policing” involving paramilitaries.

page nine

Roy Beggs opening a new factory in East Antrim

James Cooper and Jim Nicholson MEP inspecting foot and mouth protective measures on the Fermanagh border

Northern Ireland’s
economy is stronger
than ever before.
Constitutional stability
is underpinning our
new-found prosperity.

Delivering Economic Prosperity
In a relatively short time, Northern Ireland has chalked
up impressive results in jobs, overseas investment,
exports and economic performance. As soon as new
records are set, they are surpassed. Last year, the
Industrial Development Board reported its best year ever
with the promotion of almost 7,000 jobs since last May.
In addition to this, LEDU and the district councils have
created more than 3,000 jobs in investments worth
£20.6 million. Exports stand at a record £3.4 billion.
We have the fastest growing regional economy in the
UK. We head the UK league table in e-commerce.
Eight out of every ten new jobs are in high-tech
manufacturing and knowledge-based sectors.
Northern Ireland is recognised as having the youngest
and most highly talented workforce in the country.
Unemployment is now below 6%. We want the new
developments to be high-tech high value-added to offset
low-value added businesses vulnerable to competition
from low cost economies.
Within the Assembly, the UUP can help build a
stronger economy by ensuring that the right help is
directed to the right people and companies at the right
time. The tourism sector was deeply affected by the
outbreak of foot-and-mouth. We will ensure that
increased financial aid and other support will go to that
sector, and other businesses affected by foot-and-mouth,
to help them re-establish themselves and realise their
full potential.

page eleven

We have a strong economy and we can continue to see
economic improvement through our role in the
Assembly and at Westminster. The UUP will
endeavour, as always, to protect Northern Ireland’s
union with the rest of the UK therefore ensuring our
economic strength.
Ulster Unionism’s heart is with the farmers. We know
the hard times that farmers have gone through in the
past decade. We will continue to work for the new
“Farmers Loan and Early Retirement Scheme”, which
will enable older farmers to retire with dignity, a lump
sum and a pension. It will also enable “young blood”
to enter farming. This should enable the agricultural
sector to restructure.
An imaginative and well-researched “Ten-Year Business
Plan” needs to be drawn up for Northern Ireland
Agriculture to restructure and reposition it in the
global market place. This should include a major
scaling up of marketing Northern Ireland beef, greater
diversification in farm incomes, easement of planning
regulations, and a bigger slice of the DARD budget
going directly to farmers in a wide range of support
schemes. We will also seek to guarantee a future for
our Fishing Industry by renegotiating greater flexibility
into their right to fish, based on regional status within
the European Union and taking active steps to restock
depleted fishing stocks.

Councillor David McNarry candidate for Strangford

Respect for our
natural and built
environment is a
cherished Ulster
Unionist value.

Delivering a better quality of life
The preservation and enhancement of the environment
is one of the biggest challenges facing us today.
We need improved stewardship of our natural resources
and a more responsible attitude to environmental
protection. Despite our ‘green’ image, we have some of
the highest levels of atmospheric pollution in the
United Kingdom.
We will seek to deliver a co-ordinated environmental
strategy for Northern Ireland focused on sustainable
development. The establishment of an Independent
Environmental Protection Agency for Northern Ireland
is also necessary. Generally we need greater protection
for the countryside from over-development and more
quality open space in our towns and cities.
We also need to do far more to protect our built
environment and to conserve Ulster’s architectural
heritage. The new Northern Ireland must cherish what
is best from our past.
The promotion of Culture, Arts and Leisure is vital to
the progress of any self-respecting society. In Northern
Ireland, we have a fine tradition in this area. We have
produced great writers and artists, top class sportsmen
and women, and we have a wonderful diversity of
culture, diversifying further with the contribution to
our society of our ethnic minority communities.

page thirteen

These sectors are concerned with fostering creativity,
with giving individuals a sense of identity and providing
everyone with the opportunity to engage in activities to
promote their health, educational enjoyment and
personal development. There are also wider benefits for
society through job creation and tourism.
We have been instrumental in delivering increased
funding for the Arts, the capital programme for
libraries, increases in the Sports Council budget, the
establishment of the Football Task Force, developing the
Ulster Scots heritage and culture and promoting the
British identity of Northern Ireland.
We fully support the promotion of Belfast as European
City of Culture 2008. The development of new projects
such as the Odyssey complex, Cathedral Quarter,
Titanic Quarter and the Ulster Canal - all Ulster
Unionist-supported initiatives - are transforming
our Province.
The Ulster Unionist Party is committed to the
development of the maximum range of social, economic
and cultural lifestyle opportunities. Northern Ireland
has always been a good place to live. With Ulster
Unionist direction it is becoming a great place to live.

Dermot Nesbitt following a school safety announcement in South Down

We aim to introduce
more parental choice
while protecting
academic standards
and securing
improvements across
the spectrum.

Education
Our future lies with our children. For this reason the
Ulster Unionist Party continues to place Education at
the top of our list of priorities. The excellent standards
of education achieved in Northern Ireland are widely
acknowledged to be the best of any region within the
United Kingdom by far, and these standards must
be maintained.
We insist that all schools must be provided with the
means necessary to meet the demands of the National
Curriculum. There should be a “single funding
formula” for schools. We welcome the current review
of the funding formula for grant-aided schools as the
present system, using seven formulae to distribute
funds has become unwieldy and inequitable. Schools
with similar characteristics should receive comparable
levels of grant-aid regardless of their sector.
We recognise the excellent standards produced by most
of our grammar schools and the best of our nongrammar schools. We believe that the Transfer
Procedure should be retained to some degree, but
accept that the perception of some children as
“failures” at age 11 can undermine their achievements
in secondary education. Our aim is to devise a system
that leads to major improvements in the lower ranges
of the ability spectrum while protecting the
achievements of those schools that already produce
excellent results.

page fifteen

It is praiseworthy that more secondary schools are
achieving success in GCSE courses, but we recognise
that such courses are not suitable for all pupils, and so
- we support the introduction of alternative
vocationally related courses for less academic pupils.
We welcome the improved co-operation between
Further and Higher Education, Industry and
Commerce, and we are keenly aware that the attraction
of inward investment and the sharpening of Northern
Ireland’s international competitiveness are dependant
on the adequate funding of the research and
development programmes of our universities.
The UUP would like to see adequate grants to remove
the burdens of student debt and we believe that
students should not be expected to pay their own
tuition fees. We also believe that there should be
equality in funding and oppose preferential treatment
for Irish medium schools.

Lady Sylvia Hermon listening to concerns about the National Health Service in North Down

The Ulster Unionist
Party is committed to
the development of a
first class Health
Service in Northern
Ireland

Health
The National Health Service in Northern Ireland has
gone through a number of changes and there is clearly a
sense of growing crisis. Patients, professionals and
others are all deeply concerned about the Health
Service. Whilst recognising that consultations are
taking place on Acute Hospital care services, primary
care and other areas, the UUP will seek to redress the
growing lack of confidence in the management of the
National Health Service.
For too long the Health Service has been without a
strategy. Important decisions have been avoided. The
Department has hidden behind the Boards. The
Boards have used the Department as an excuse. One
review follows another and hospital services are subject
to unplanned change and, in some cases, collapse.
We believe that there must be much greater emphasis
on primary care. Co-operatives of all health
professionals should be formed to deliver primary care
locally, with local polyclinics or community hospitals as
their focus. Such co-operatives must have financial
responsibility with control of their own budgets. Acute
care should be managed through a single Hospitals
Authority for Northern Ireland.

page seventeen

There needs to be greater efficiency. Northern Ireland
has higher health spending per head of the population
than in Great Britain, yet the output is poorer. Our
waiting lists are much longer than across the water.
Huge sums of public money have been made available an extra £150 million this year, yet there is little sign of
better services for the patient. The review of Public
Administration should be used as an opportunity to
streamline administration and release resources for
frontline services. Better use should also be made of the
Health Service’s human resources through more flexible
working. For example, more use should be made of
nurses in prescribing.
The Ulster Unionist Party is committed to the
development of a first-class Health Service in Northern
Ireland, implementing health promotion strategies and
prioritising areas where action is needed to redress
unsatisfactory public health.

Councillor Sylvia McRoberts candidate in Newry and Armagh

William Thompson and Martin Smyth at a Westminster engagement

William Ross with a group of school-children on a trip to Westminster

We are determined to
reduce costs
and the number of
administrative bodies.
The local council area
should be the unit for
the delivery of local
services.

Delivering reformed
Public Administration
Despite the inadequacy of the local government system
over the past thirty years, we have worked to ensure
that this essential layer of government has survived.
More powers should be devolved to councils with a
review of the whole structure of public administration.
We are determined to reduce the cost of
administration and to reduce the amount of
unnecessary administrative bodies. The review should
also ensure improvement in performance and
responsiveness. There should be a critical examination
of the many expensive, unelected quangos, with a view
to making their functions accountable, either through
the Assembly or local councils.
In areas of health and education, we will seek to reduce
the amount of duplication in administration.

page nineteen

We would like to see more streamlined and efficient
governmental structures. As a broad principle, we
think that the local council area should be the
geographic unit for the delivery of all local services.
We should also consider what should be better
administered regionally with a presumption in favour
of administration through the Departments.
Local councillors have a greater knowledge of the
needs of their areas and a capacity to ensure effective
co-ordination and leadership. However, we still believe
that streamlining is still necessary. In general, we
would like to see wider powers given to councillors,
reduction in cost of over-administration, review of
health and education boards, representation for
councils in Brussels, the right to fly the Union flag and
a review of rating.

The Union secured,
building your future
At the last UK general election in 1997, the UUP Manifesto
“Secure the Union, Build your future” sought several specific reforms:“Our objectives are to repair the damage done to the Union by Direct Rule
and the Anglo-Irish Agreement and to build a stronger, broader-based Union”;
“We wish to see the failed Anglo-Irish Agreement replaced. Any new Agreement
must be based on the wishes of the people of Northern Ireland - the principle of consent”;
“The Agreement must also enable everybody in Northern Ireland
to participate in local administration on an equal basis”;
“Ulster Unionist proposals for a Northern Ireland Assembly are based on the principle
of proportionality; elected representatives will be able to participate at all levels
and at all stages in proportion to their electoral strength”;
“We wish to see the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
incorporated into UK law”;
“We would welcome genuinely beneficial co-operation with our southern neighbour
but that must be based on mutual respect and recognition”;
“The broader Agreement must look to the totality of relations within the British Isles”;
“A genuinely British-Irish Agreement should replace the flawed Anglo-Irish Agreement.”

All of these commitments have been delivered!

page twenty
